بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful.

الحمد لله رب العالمين
Praise be to Allah, the Cherisher and Sustainer of the worlds;

الرحمن الرحيم
Most Gracious, Most Merciful;

مالك يوم الدين
Master of the Day of Judgment.

إياك نعبد وإياك نستعين
Thee do we worship, and Thine aid we seek.

اهدنا الصراط المستقيم
Show us the straight way,

صراط الذين أنعمت عليهم غير المغضوب عليهم ولا الضالين
The way of those on whom Thou hast bestowed Thy Grace, those whose (portion) is not wrath, and who go not astray.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الم
A. L. M.

ذلك الكتاب لا ريب فيه هدى للمتقين
This is the Book; in it is guidance sure, without doubt, to those who fear Allah;

الذين يؤمنون بالغيب ويقيمون الصلاة ومما رزقناهم ينفقون
Who believe in the Unseen, are steadfast in prayer, and spend out of what We have provided for them;

والذين يؤمنون بما أنزل إليك وما أنزل من قبلك وبالآخرة هم يوقنون
And who believe in the Revelation sent to thee, and sent before thy time, and (in their hearts) have the assurance of the Hereafter.

أولئك على هدى من ربهم وأولئك هم المفلحون
They are on (true) guidance, from their Lord, and it is these who will prosper.

إن الذين كفروا سواء عليهم أأنذرتهم أم لم تنذرهم لا يؤمنون
As to those who reject Faith, it is the same to them whether thou warn them or do not warn them; they will not believe.

ختم الله على قلوبهم وعلى سمعهم وعلى أبصارهم غشاوة ولهم عذاب عظيم
Allah hath set a seal on their hearts and on their hearing, and on their eyes is a veil; great is the penalty they (incur).

ومن الناس من يقول آمنا بالله وباليوم الآخر وما هم بمؤمنين
Of the people there are some who say: "We believe in Allah and the Last Day;" but they do not (really) believe.

يخادعون الله والذين آمنوا وما يخدعون إلا أنفسهم وما يشعرون
Fain would they deceive Allah and those who believe, but they only deceive themselves, and realise (it) not!

في قلوبهم مرض فزادهم الله مرضا ولهم عذاب أليم بما كانوا يكذبون
In their hearts is a disease; and Allah has increased their disease: And grievous is the penalty they (incur), because they are false (to themselves).

وإذا قيل لهم لا تفسدوا في الأرض قالوا إنما نحن مصلحون
When it is said to them: "Make not mischief on the earth," they say: "Why, we only Want to make peace!"

ألا إنهم هم المفسدون ولكن لا يشعرون
Of a surety, they are the ones who make mischief, but they realise (it) not.

وإذا قيل لهم آمنوا كما آمن الناس قالوا أنؤمن كما آمن السفهاء ألا إنهم هم السفهاء ولكن لا يعلمون
When it is said to them: "Believe as the others believe:" They say: "Shall we believe as the fools believe?" Nay, of a surety they are the fools, but they do not know.

وإذا لقوا الذين آمنوا قالوا آمنا وإذا خلوا إلى شياطينهم قالوا إنا معكم إنما نحن مستهزئون
When they meet those who believe, they say: "We believe;" but when they are alone with their evil ones, they say: "We are really with you: We (were) only jesting."

الله يستهزئ بهم ويمدهم في طغيانهم يعمهون
Allah will throw back their mockery on them, and give them rope in their trespasses; so they will wander like blind ones (To and fro).

أولئك الذين اشتروا الضلالة بالهدى فما ربحت تجارتهم وما كانوا مهتدين
These are they who have bartered Guidance for error: But their traffic is profitless, and they have lost true direction,

مثلهم كمثل الذي استوقد نارا فلما أضاءت ما حوله ذهب الله بنورهم وتركهم في ظلمات لا يبصرون
Their similitude is that of a man who kindled a fire; when it lighted all around him, Allah took away their light and left them in utter darkness. So they could not see.

صم بكم عمي فهم لا يرجعون
Deaf, dumb, and blind, they will not return (to the path).

أو كصيب من السماء فيه ظلمات ورعد وبرق يجعلون أصابعهم في آذانهم من الصواعق حذر الموت والله محيط بالكافرين
Or (another similitude) is that of a rain-laden cloud from the sky: In it are zones of darkness, and thunder and lightning: They press their fingers in their ears to keep out the stunning thunder-clap, the while they are in terror of death. But Allah is ever round the rejecters of Faith!

يكاد البرق يخطف أبصارهم كلما أضاء لهم مشوا فيه وإذا أظلم عليهم قاموا ولو شاء الله لذهب بسمعهم وأبصارهم إن الله على كل شيء قدير
The lightning all but snatches away their sight; every time the light (Helps) them, they walk therein, and when the darkness grows on them, they stand still. And if Allah willed, He could take away their faculty of hearing and seeing; for Allah hath power over all things.

يا أيها الناس اعبدوا ربكم الذي خلقكم والذين من قبلكم لعلكم تتقون
O ye people! Adore your Guardian-Lord, who created you and those who came before you, that ye may have the chance to learn righteousness;

الذي جعل لكم الأرض فراشا والسماء بناء وأنزل من السماء ماء فأخرج به من الثمرات رزقا لكم فلا تجعلوا لله أندادا وأنتم تعلمون
Who has made the earth your couch, and the heavens your canopy; and sent down rain from the heavens; and brought forth therewith Fruits for your sustenance; then set not up rivals unto Allah when ye know (the truth).

وإن كنتم في ريب مما نزلنا على عبدنا فأتوا بسورة من مثله وادعوا شهداءكم من دون الله إن كنتم صادقين
And if ye are in doubt as to what We have revealed from time to time to Our servant, then produce a Sura like thereunto; and call your witnesses or helpers (If there are any) besides Allah, if your (doubts) are true.

فإن لم تفعلوا ولن تفعلوا فاتقوا النار التي وقودها الناس والحجارة أعدت للكافرين
But if ye cannot- and of a surety ye cannot- then fear the Fire whose fuel is men and stones,- which is prepared for those who reject Faith.

وبشر الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات أن لهم جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار كلما رزقوا منها من ثمرة رزقا قالوا هذا الذي رزقنا من قبل وأتوا به متشابها ولهم فيها أزواج مطهرة وهم فيها خالدون
But give glad tidings to those who believe and work righteousness, that their portion is Gardens, beneath which rivers flow. Every time they are fed with fruits therefrom, they say: "Why, this is what we were fed with before," for they are given things in similitude; and they have therein companions pure (and holy); and they abide therein (for ever).

إن الله لا يستحيي أن يضرب مثلا ما بعوضة فما فوقها فأما الذين آمنوا فيعلمون أنه الحق من ربهم وأما الذين كفروا فيقولون ماذا أراد الله بهذا مثلا يضل به كثيرا ويهدي به كثيرا وما يضل به إلا الفاسقين
Allah disdains not to use the similitude of things, lowest as well as highest. Those who believe know that it is truth from their Lord; but those who reject Faith say: "What means Allah by this similitude?" By it He causes many to stray, and many He leads into the right path; but He causes not to stray, except those who forsake (the path),-

الذين ينقضون عهد الله من بعد ميثاقه ويقطعون ما أمر الله به أن يوصل ويفسدون في الأرض أولئك هم الخاسرون
Those who break Allah's Covenant after it is ratified, and who sunder what Allah Has ordered to be joined, and do mischief on earth: These cause loss (only) to themselves.

كيف تكفرون بالله وكنتم أمواتا فأحياكم ثم يميتكم ثم يحييكم ثم إليه ترجعون
How can ye reject the faith in Allah?- seeing that ye were without life, and He gave you life; then will He cause you to die, and will again bring you to life; and again to Him will ye return.

هو الذي خلق لكم ما في الأرض جميعا ثم استوى إلى السماء فسواهن سبع سماوات وهو بكل شيء عليم
It is He Who hath created for you all things that are on earth; Moreover His design comprehended the heavens, for He gave order and perfection to the seven firmaments; and of all things He hath perfect knowledge.

وإذ قال ربك للملائكة إني جاعل في الأرض خليفة قالوا أتجعل فيها من يفسد فيها ويسفك الدماء ونحن نسبح بحمدك ونقدس لك قال إني أعلم ما لا تعلمون
Behold, thy Lord said to the angels: "I will create a vicegerent on earth." They said: "Wilt Thou place therein one who will make mischief therein and shed blood?- whilst we do celebrate Thy praises and glorify Thy holy (name)?" He said: "I know what ye know not."

وعلم آدم الأسماء كلها ثم عرضهم على الملائكة فقال أنبئوني بأسماء هؤلاء إن كنتم صادقين
And He taught Adam the names of all things; then He placed them before the angels, and said: "Tell me the names of these if ye are right."

قالوا سبحانك لا علم لنا إلا ما علمتنا إنك أنت العليم الحكيم
They said: "Glory to Thee, of knowledge We have none, save what Thou Hast taught us: In truth it is Thou Who art perfect in knowledge and wisdom."

قال يا آدم أنبئهم بأسمائهم فلما أنبأهم بأسمائهم قال ألم أقل لكم إني أعلم غيب السماوات والأرض وأعلم ما تبدون وما كنتم تكتمون
He said: "O Adam! Tell them their names." When he had told them, Allah said: "Did I not tell you that I know the secrets of heaven and earth, and I know what ye reveal and what ye conceal?"

وإذ قلنا للملائكة اسجدوا لآدم فسجدوا إلا إبليس أبى واستكبر وكان من الكافرين
And behold, We said to the angels: "Bow down to Adam" and they bowed down. Not so Iblis: he refused and was haughty: He was of those who reject Faith.

وقلنا يا آدم اسكن أنت وزوجك الجنة وكلا منها رغدا حيث شئتما ولا تقربا هذه الشجرة فتكونا من الظالمين
We said: "O Adam! dwell thou and thy wife in the Garden; and eat of the bountiful things therein as (where and when) ye will; but approach not this tree, or ye run into harm and transgression."

فأزلهما الشيطان عنها فأخرجهما مما كانا فيه وقلنا اهبطوا بعضكم لبعض عدو ولكم في الأرض مستقر ومتاع إلى حين
Then did Satan make them slip from the (garden), and get them out of the state (of felicity) in which they had been. We said: "Get ye down, all (ye people), with enmity between yourselves. On earth will be your dwelling-place and your means of livelihood - for a time."

فتلقى آدم من ربه كلمات فتاب عليه إنه هو التواب الرحيم
Then learnt Adam from his Lord words of inspiration, and his Lord Turned towards him; for He is Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

قلنا اهبطوا منها جميعا فإما يأتينكم مني هدى فمن تبع هداي فلا خوف عليهم ولا هم يحزنون
We said: "Get ye down all from here; and if, as is sure, there comes to you Guidance from me, whosoever follows My guidance, on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.

والذين كفروا وكذبوا بآياتنا أولئك أصحاب النار هم فيها خالدون
"But those who reject Faith and belie Our Signs, they shall be companions of the Fire; they shall abide therein."

يا بني إسرائيل اذكروا نعمتي التي أنعمت عليكم وأوفوا بعهدي أوف بعهدكم وإياي فارهبون
O Children of Israel! call to mind the (special) favour which I bestowed upon you, and fulfil your covenant with Me as I fulfil My Covenant with you, and fear none but Me.

وآمنوا بما أنزلت مصدقا لما معكم ولا تكونوا أول كافر به ولا تشتروا بآياتي ثمنا قليلا وإياي فاتقون
And believe in what I reveal, confirming the revelation which is with you, and be not the first to reject Faith therein, nor sell My Signs for a small price; and fear Me, and Me alone.

ولا تلبسوا الحق بالباطل وتكتموا الحق وأنتم تعلمون
And cover not Truth with falsehood, nor conceal the Truth when ye know (what it is).

وأقيموا الصلاة وآتوا الزكاة واركعوا مع الراكعين
And be steadfast in prayer; practise regular charity; and bow down your heads with those who bow down (in worship).

أتأمرون الناس بالبر وتنسون أنفسكم وأنتم تتلون الكتاب أفلا تعقلون
Do ye enjoin right conduct on the people, and forget (To practise it) yourselves, and yet ye study the Scripture? Will ye not understand?

واستعينوا بالصبر والصلاة وإنها لكبيرة إلا على الخاشعين
Nay, seek (Allah's) help with patient perseverance and prayer: It is indeed hard, except to those who bring a lowly spirit,-

الذين يظنون أنهم ملاقو ربهم وأنهم إليه راجعون
Who bear in mind the certainty that they are to meet their Lord, and that they are to return to Him.

يا بني إسرائيل اذكروا نعمتي التي أنعمت عليكم وأني فضلتكم على العالمين
Children of Israel! call to mind the (special) favour which I bestowed upon you, and that I preferred you to all other (for My Message).

واتقوا يوما لا تجزي نفس عن نفس شيئا ولا يقبل منها شفاعة ولا يؤخذ منها عدل ولا هم ينصرون
Then guard yourselves against a day when one soul shall not avail another nor shall intercession be accepted for her, nor shall compensation be taken from her, nor shall anyone be helped (from outside).

وإذ نجيناكم من آل فرعون يسومونكم سوء العذاب يذبحون أبناءكم ويستحيون نساءكم وفي ذلكم بلاء من ربكم عظيم
And remember, We delivered you from the people of Pharaoh: They set you hard tasks and punishments, slaughtered your sons and let your women-folk live; therein was a tremendous trial from your Lord.

وإذ فرقنا بكم البحر فأنجيناكم وأغرقنا آل فرعون وأنتم تنظرون
And remember We divided the sea for you and saved you and drowned Pharaoh's people within your very sight.

وإذ واعدنا موسى أربعين ليلة ثم اتخذتم العجل من بعده وأنتم ظالمون
And remember We appointed forty nights for Moses, and in his absence ye took the calf (for worship), and ye did grievous wrong.

ثم عفونا عنكم من بعد ذلك لعلكم تشكرون
Even then We did forgive you; there was a chance for you to be grateful.

وإذ آتينا موسى الكتاب والفرقان لعلكم تهتدون
And remember We gave Moses the Scripture and the Criterion (Between right and wrong): There was a chance for you to be guided aright.

وإذ قال موسى لقومه يا قوم إنكم ظلمتم أنفسكم باتخاذكم العجل فتوبوا إلى بارئكم فاقتلوا أنفسكم ذلكم خير لكم عند بارئكم فتاب عليكم إنه هو التواب الرحيم
And remember Moses said to his people: "O my people! Ye have indeed wronged yourselves by your worship of the calf: So turn (in repentance) to your Maker, and slay yourselves (the wrong-doers); that will be better for you in the sight of your Maker." Then He turned towards you (in forgiveness): For He is Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

وإذ قلتم يا موسى لن نؤمن لك حتى نرى الله جهرة فأخذتكم الصاعقة وأنتم تنظرون
And remember ye said: "O Moses! We shall never believe in thee until we see Allah manifestly," but ye were dazed with thunder and lighting even as ye looked on.

ثم بعثناكم من بعد موتكم لعلكم تشكرون
Then We raised you up after your death: Ye had the chance to be grateful.

وظللنا عليكم الغمام وأنزلنا عليكم المن والسلوى كلوا من طيبات ما رزقناكم وما ظلمونا ولكن كانوا أنفسهم يظلمون
And We gave you the shade of clouds and sent down to you Manna and quails, saying: "Eat of the good things We have provided for you:" (But they rebelled); to us they did no harm, but they harmed their own souls.

وإذ قلنا ادخلوا هذه القرية فكلوا منها حيث شئتم رغدا وادخلوا الباب سجدا وقولوا حطة نغفر لكم خطاياكم وسنزيد المحسنين
And remember We said: "Enter this town, and eat of the plenty therein as ye wish; but enter the gate with humility, in posture and in words, and We shall forgive you your faults and increase (the portion of) those who do good."

فبدل الذين ظلموا قولا غير الذي قيل لهم فأنزلنا على الذين ظلموا رجزا من السماء بما كانوا يفسقون
But the transgressors changed the word from that which had been given them; so We sent on the transgressors a plague from heaven, for that they infringed (Our command) repeatedly.

وإذ استسقى موسى لقومه فقلنا اضرب بعصاك الحجر فانفجرت منه اثنتا عشرة عينا قد علم كل أناس مشربهم كلوا واشربوا من رزق الله ولا تعثوا في الأرض مفسدين
And remember Moses prayed for water for his people; We said: "Strike the rock with thy staff." Then gushed forth therefrom twelve springs. Each group knew its own place for water. So eat and drink of the sustenance provided by Allah, and do no evil nor mischief on the (face of the) earth.

وإذ قلتم يا موسى لن نصبر على طعام واحد فادع لنا ربك يخرج لنا مما تنبت الأرض من بقلها وقثائها وفومها وعدسها وبصلها قال أتستبدلون الذي هو أدنى بالذي هو خير اهبطوا مصرا فإن لكم ما سألتم وضربت عليهم الذلة والمسكنة وباءوا بغضب من الله ذلك بأنهم كانوا يكفرون بآيات الله ويقتلون النبيين بغير الحق ذلك بما عصوا وكانوا يعتدون
And remember ye said: "O Moses! we cannot endure one kind of food (always); so beseech thy Lord for us to produce for us of what the earth groweth, -its pot-herbs, and cucumbers, Its garlic, lentils, and onions." He said: "Will ye exchange the better for the worse? Go ye down to any town, and ye shall find what ye want!" They were covered with humiliation and misery; they drew on themselves the wrath of Allah. This because they went on rejecting the Signs of Allah and slaying His Messengers without just cause. This because they rebelled and went on transgressing.

إن الذين آمنوا والذين هادوا والنصارى والصابئين من آمن بالله واليوم الآخر وعمل صالحا فلهم أجرهم عند ربهم ولا خوف عليهم ولا هم يحزنون
Those who believe (in the Qur'an), and those who follow the Jewish (scriptures), and the Christians and the Sabians,- any who believe in Allah and the Last Day, and work righteousness, shall have their reward with their Lord; on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.

وإذ أخذنا ميثاقكم ورفعنا فوقكم الطور خذوا ما آتيناكم بقوة واذكروا ما فيه لعلكم تتقون
And remember We took your covenant and We raised above you (The towering height) of Mount (Sinai): (Saying): "Hold firmly to what We have given you and bring (ever) to remembrance what is therein: Perchance ye may fear Allah."

ثم توليتم من بعد ذلك فلولا فضل الله عليكم ورحمته لكنتم من الخاسرين
But ye turned back thereafter: Had it not been for the Grace and Mercy of Allah to you, ye had surely been among the lost.

ولقد علمتم الذين اعتدوا منكم في السبت فقلنا لهم كونوا قردة خاسئين
And well ye knew those amongst you who transgressed in the matter of the Sabbath: We said to them: "Be ye apes, despised and rejected."

فجعلناها نكالا لما بين يديها وما خلفها وموعظة للمتقين
So We made it an example to their own time and to their posterity, and a lesson to those who fear Allah.

وإذ قال موسى لقومه إن الله يأمركم أن تذبحوا بقرة قالوا أتتخذنا هزوا قال أعوذ بالله أن أكون من الجاهلين
And remember Moses said to his people: "Allah commands that ye sacrifice a heifer." They said: "Makest thou a laughing-stock of us?" He said: "Allah save me from being an ignorant (fool)!"

قالوا ادع لنا ربك يبين لنا ما هي قال إنه يقول إنها بقرة لا فارض ولا بكر عوان بين ذلك فافعلوا ما تؤمرون
They said: "Beseech on our behalf Thy Lord to make plain to us what (heifer) it is!" He said; "He says: The heifer should be neither too old nor too young, but of middling age. Now do what ye are commanded!"

قالوا ادع لنا ربك يبين لنا ما لونها قال إنه يقول إنها بقرة صفراء فاقع لونها تسر الناظرين
They said: "Beseech on our behalf Thy Lord to make plain to us Her colour." He said: "He says: A fawn-coloured heifer, pure and rich in tone, the admiration of beholders!"

قالوا ادع لنا ربك يبين لنا ما هي إن البقر تشابه علينا وإنا إن شاء الله لمهتدون
They said: "Beseech on our behalf Thy Lord to make plain to us what she is: To us are all heifers alike: We wish indeed for guidance, if Allah wills."

قال إنه يقول إنها بقرة لا ذلول تثير الأرض ولا تسقي الحرث مسلمة لا شية فيها قالوا الآن جئت بالحق فذبحوها وما كادوا يفعلون
He said: "He says: A heifer not trained to till the soil or water the fields; sound and without blemish." They said: "Now hast thou brought the truth." Then they offered her in sacrifice, but not with good-will.

وإذ قتلتم نفسا فادارأتم فيها والله مخرج ما كنتم تكتمون
Remember ye slew a man and fell into a dispute among yourselves as to the crime: But Allah was to bring forth what ye did hide.

فقلنا اضربوه ببعضها كذلك يحيي الله الموتى ويريكم آياته لعلكم تعقلون
So We said: "Strike the (body) with a piece of the (heifer)." Thus Allah bringeth the dead to life and showeth you His Signs: Perchance ye may understand.

ثم قست قلوبكم من بعد ذلك فهي كالحجارة أو أشد قسوة وإن من الحجارة لما يتفجر منه الأنهار وإن منها لما يشقق فيخرج منه الماء وإن منها لما يهبط من خشية الله وما الله بغافل عما تعملون
Thenceforth were your hearts hardened: They became like a rock and even worse in hardness. For among rocks there are some from which rivers gush forth; others there are which when split asunder send forth water; and others which sink for fear of Allah. And Allah is not unmindful of what ye do.

أفتطمعون أن يؤمنوا لكم وقد كان فريق منهم يسمعون كلام الله ثم يحرفونه من بعد ما عقلوه وهم يعلمون
Can ye (o ye men of Faith) entertain the hope that they will believe in you?- Seeing that a party of them heard the Word of Allah, and perverted it knowingly after they understood it.

وإذا لقوا الذين آمنوا قالوا آمنا وإذا خلا بعضهم إلى بعض قالوا أتحدثونهم بما فتح الله عليكم ليحاجوكم به عند ربكم أفلا تعقلون
Behold! when they meet the men of Faith, they say: "We believe": But when they meet each other in private, they say: "Shall you tell them what Allah hath revealed to you, that they may engage you in argument about it before your Lord?"- Do ye not understand (their aim)?

أولا يعلمون أن الله يعلم ما يسرون وما يعلنون
Know they not that Allah knoweth what they conceal and what they reveal?

ومنهم أميون لا يعلمون الكتاب إلا أماني وإن هم إلا يظنون
And there are among them illiterates, who know not the Book, but (see therein their own) desires, and they do nothing but conjecture.

فويل للذين يكتبون الكتاب بأيديهم ثم يقولون هذا من عند الله ليشتروا به ثمنا قليلا فويل لهم مما كتبت أيديهم وويل لهم مما يكسبون
Then woe to those who write the Book with their own hands, and then say:"This is from Allah," to traffic with it for miserable price!- Woe to them for what their hands do write, and for the gain they make thereby.

وقالوا لن تمسنا النار إلا أياما معدودة قل أتخذتم عند الله عهدا فلن يخلف الله عهده أم تقولون على الله ما لا تعلمون
And they say: "The Fire shall not touch us but for a few numbered days:" Say: "Have ye taken a promise from Allah, for He never breaks His promise? or is it that ye say of Allah what ye do not know?"

بلى من كسب سيئة وأحاطت به خطيئته فأولئك أصحاب النار هم فيها خالدون
Nay, those who seek gain in evil, and are girt round by their sins,- they are companions of the Fire: Therein shall they abide (For ever).

والذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات أولئك أصحاب الجنة هم فيها خالدون
But those who have faith and work righteousness, they are companions of the Garden: Therein shall they abide (For ever).

وإذ أخذنا ميثاق بني إسرائيل لا تعبدون إلا الله وبالوالدين إحسانا وذي القربى واليتامى والمساكين وقولوا للناس حسنا وأقيموا الصلاة وآتوا الزكاة ثم توليتم إلا قليلا منكم وأنتم معرضون
And remember We took a covenant from the Children of Israel (to this effect): Worship none but Allah; treat with kindness your parents and kindred, and orphans and those in need; speak fair to the people; be steadfast in prayer; and practise regular charity. Then did ye turn back, except a few among you, and ye backslide (even now).

وإذ أخذنا ميثاقكم لا تسفكون دماءكم ولا تخرجون أنفسكم من دياركم ثم أقررتم وأنتم تشهدون
And remember We took your covenant (to this effect): Shed no blood amongst you, nor turn out your own people from your homes: and this ye solemnly ratified, and to this ye can bear witness.

ثم أنتم هؤلاء تقتلون أنفسكم وتخرجون فريقا منكم من ديارهم تظاهرون عليهم بالإثم والعدوان وإن يأتوكم أسارى تفادوهم وهو محرم عليكم إخراجهم أفتؤمنون ببعض الكتاب وتكفرون ببعض فما جزاء من يفعل ذلك منكم إلا خزي في الحياة الدنيا ويوم القيامة يردون إلى أشد العذاب وما الله بغافل عما تعملون
After this it is ye, the same people, who slay among yourselves, and banish a party of you from their homes; assist (Their enemies) against them, in guilt and rancour; and if they come to you as captives, ye ransom them, though it was not lawful for you to banish them. Then is it only a part of the Book that ye believe in, and do ye reject the rest? but what is the reward for those among you who behave like this but disgrace in this life?- and on the Day of Judgment they shall be consigned to the most grievous penalty. For Allah is not unmindful of what ye do.

أولئك الذين اشتروا الحياة الدنيا بالآخرة فلا يخفف عنهم العذاب ولا هم ينصرون
These are the people who buy the life of this world at the price of the Hereafter: their penalty shall not be lightened nor shall they be helped.

ولقد آتينا موسى الكتاب وقفينا من بعده بالرسل وآتينا عيسى ابن مريم البينات وأيدناه بروح القدس أفكلما جاءكم رسول بما لا تهوى أنفسكم استكبرتم ففريقا كذبتم وفريقا تقتلون
We gave Moses the Book and followed him up with a succession of messengers; We gave Jesus the son of Mary Clear (Signs) and strengthened him with the holy spirit. Is it that whenever there comes to you a messenger with what ye yourselves desire not, ye are puffed up with pride?- Some ye called impostors, and others ye slay!

وقالوا قلوبنا غلف بل لعنهم الله بكفرهم فقليلا ما يؤمنون
They say, "Our hearts are the wrappings (which preserve Allah's Word: we need no more)." Nay, Allah's curse is on them for their blasphemy: Little is it they believe.

ولما جاءهم كتاب من عند الله مصدق لما معهم وكانوا من قبل يستفتحون على الذين كفروا فلما جاءهم ما عرفوا كفروا به فلعنة الله على الكافرين
And when there comes to them a Book from Allah, confirming what is with them,- although from of old they had prayed for victory against those without Faith,- when there comes to them that which they (should) have recognised, they refuse to believe in it but the curse of Allah is on those without Faith.

بئسما اشتروا به أنفسهم أن يكفروا بما أنزل الله بغيا أن ينزل الله من فضله على من يشاء من عباده فباءوا بغضب على غضب وللكافرين عذاب مهين
Miserable is the price for which they have sold their souls, in that they deny (the revelation) which Allah has sent down, in insolent envy that Allah of His Grace should send it to any of His servants He pleases: Thus have they drawn on themselves Wrath upon Wrath. And humiliating is the punishment of those who reject Faith.

وإذا قيل لهم آمنوا بما أنزل الله قالوا نؤمن بما أنزل علينا ويكفرون بما وراءه وهو الحق مصدقا لما معهم قل فلم تقتلون أنبياء الله من قبل إن كنتم مؤمنين
When it is said to them, "Believe in what Allah Hath sent down, "they say, "We believe in what was sent down to us:" yet they reject all besides, even if it be Truth confirming what is with them. Say: "Why then have ye slain the prophets of Allah in times gone by, if ye did indeed believe?"

ولقد جاءكم موسى بالبينات ثم اتخذتم العجل من بعده وأنتم ظالمون
There came to you Moses with clear (Signs); yet ye worshipped the calf (Even) after that, and ye did behave wrongfully.

وإذ أخذنا ميثاقكم ورفعنا فوقكم الطور خذوا ما آتيناكم بقوة واسمعوا قالوا سمعنا وعصينا وأشربوا في قلوبهم العجل بكفرهم قل بئسما يأمركم به إيمانكم إن كنتم مؤمنين
And remember We took your covenant and We raised above you (the towering height) of Mount (Sinai): (Saying): "Hold firmly to what We have given you, and hearken (to the Law)": They said:" We hear, and we disobey:" And they had to drink into their hearts (of the taint) of the calf because of their Faithlessness. Say: "Vile indeed are the behests of your Faith if ye have any faith!"

قل إن كانت لكم الدار الآخرة عند الله خالصة من دون الناس فتمنوا الموت إن كنتم صادقين
Say: "If the last Home, with Allah, be for you specially, and not for anyone else, then seek ye for death, if ye are sincere."

ولن يتمنوه أبدا بما قدمت أيديهم والله عليم بالظالمين
But they will never seek for death, on account of the (sins) which their hands have sent on before them. and Allah is well-acquainted with the wrong-doers.

ولتجدنهم أحرص الناس على حياة ومن الذين أشركوا يود أحدهم لو يعمر ألف سنة وما هو بمزحزحه من العذاب أن يعمر والله بصير بما يعملون
Thou wilt indeed find them, of all people, most greedy of life,-even more than the idolaters: Each one of them wishes He could be given a life of a thousand years: But the grant of such life will not save him from (due) punishment. For Allah sees well all that they do.

قل من كان عدوا لجبريل فإنه نزله على قلبك بإذن الله مصدقا لما بين يديه وهدى وبشرى للمؤمنين
Say: Whoever is an enemy to Gabriel-for he brings down the (revelation) to thy heart by Allah's will, a confirmation of what went before, and guidance and glad tidings for those who believe,-

من كان عدوا لله وملائكته ورسله وجبريل وميكال فإن الله عدو للكافرين
Whoever is an enemy to Allah and His angels and messengers, to Gabriel and Michael,- Lo! Allah is an enemy to those who reject Faith.

ولقد أنزلنا إليك آيات بينات وما يكفر بها إلا الفاسقون
We have sent down to thee Manifest Signs (ayat); and none reject them but those who are perverse.

أوكلما عاهدوا عهدا نبذه فريق منهم بل أكثرهم لا يؤمنون
Is it not (the case) that every time they make a covenant, some party among them throw it aside?- Nay, Most of them are faithless.

ولما جاءهم رسول من عند الله مصدق لما معهم نبذ فريق من الذين أوتوا الكتاب كتاب الله وراء ظهورهم كأنهم لا يعلمون
And when there came to them a messenger from Allah, confirming what was with them, a party of the people of the Book threw away the Book of Allah behind their backs, as if (it had been something) they did not know!

واتبعوا ما تتلو الشياطين على ملك سليمان وما كفر سليمان ولكن الشياطين كفروا يعلمون الناس السحر وما أنزل على الملكين ببابل هاروت وماروت وما يعلمان من أحد حتى يقولا إنما نحن فتنة فلا تكفر فيتعلمون منهما ما يفرقون به بين المرء وزوجه وما هم بضارين به من أحد إلا بإذن الله ويتعلمون ما يضرهم ولا ينفعهم ولقد علموا لمن اشتراه ما له في الآخرة من خلاق ولبئس ما شروا به أنفسهم لو كانوا يعلمون
They followed what the evil ones gave out (falsely) against the power of Solomon: the blasphemers Were, not Solomon, but the evil ones, teaching men Magic, and such things as came down at babylon to the angels Harut and Marut. But neither of these taught anyone (Such things) without saying: "We are only for trial; so do not blaspheme." They learned from them the means to sow discord between man and wife. But they could not thus harm anyone except by Allah's permission. And they learned what harmed them, not what profited them. And they knew that the buyers of (magic) would have no share in the happiness of the Hereafter. And vile was the price for which they did sell their souls, if they but knew!

ولو أنهم آمنوا واتقوا لمثوبة من عند الله خير لو كانوا يعلمون
If they had kept their Faith and guarded themselves from evil, far better had been the reward from their Lord, if they but knew!

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تقولوا راعنا وقولوا انظرنا واسمعوا وللكافرين عذاب أليم
O ye of Faith! Say not (to the Messenger) words of ambiguous import, but words of respect; and hearken (to him): To those without Faith is a grievous punishment.

ما يود الذين كفروا من أهل الكتاب ولا المشركين أن ينزل عليكم من خير من ربكم والله يختص برحمته من يشاء والله ذو الفضل العظيم
It is never the wish of those without Faith among the People of the Book, nor of the Pagans, that anything good should come down to you from your Lord. But Allah will choose for His special Mercy whom He will - for Allah is Lord of grace abounding.

ما ننسخ من آية أو ننسها نأت بخير منها أو مثلها ألم تعلم أن الله على كل شيء قدير
None of Our revelations do We abrogate or cause to be forgotten, but We substitute something better or similar: Knowest thou not that Allah Hath power over all things?

ألم تعلم أن الله له ملك السماوات والأرض وما لكم من دون الله من ولي ولا نصير
Knowest thou not that to Allah belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth? And besides Him ye have neither patron nor helper.

أم تريدون أن تسألوا رسولكم كما سئل موسى من قبل ومن يتبدل الكفر بالإيمان فقد ضل سواء السبيل
Would ye question your Messenger as Moses was questioned of old? but whoever changeth from Faith to Unbelief, Hath strayed without doubt from the even way.

ود كثير من أهل الكتاب لو يردونكم من بعد إيمانكم كفارا حسدا من عند أنفسهم من بعد ما تبين لهم الحق فاعفوا واصفحوا حتى يأتي الله بأمره إن الله على كل شيء قدير
Quite a number of the People of the Book wish they could Turn you (people) back to infidelity after ye have believed, from selfish envy, after the Truth hath become Manifest unto them: But forgive and overlook, Till Allah accomplish His purpose; for Allah Hath power over all things.

وأقيموا الصلاة وآتوا الزكاة وما تقدموا لأنفسكم من خير تجدوه عند الله إن الله بما تعملون بصير
And be steadfast in prayer and regular in charity: And whatever good ye send forth for your souls before you, ye shall find it with Allah: for Allah sees Well all that ye do.

وقالوا لن يدخل الجنة إلا من كان هودا أو نصارى تلك أمانيهم قل هاتوا برهانكم إن كنتم صادقين
And they say: "None shall enter Paradise unless he be a Jew or a Christian." Those are their (vain) desires. Say: "Produce your proof if ye are truthful."

بلى من أسلم وجهه لله وهو محسن فله أجره عند ربه ولا خوف عليهم ولا هم يحزنون
Nay,-whoever submits His whole self to Allah and is a doer of good,- He will get his reward with his Lord; on such shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.

وقالت اليهود ليست النصارى على شيء وقالت النصارى ليست اليهود على شيء وهم يتلون الكتاب كذلك قال الذين لا يعلمون مثل قولهم فالله يحكم بينهم يوم القيامة فيما كانوا فيه يختلفون
The Jews say: "The Christians have naught (to stand) upon; and the Christians say: "The Jews have naught (To stand) upon." Yet they (Profess to) study the (same) Book. Like unto their word is what those say who know not; but Allah will judge between them in their quarrel on the Day of Judgment.

ومن أظلم ممن منع مساجد الله أن يذكر فيها اسمه وسعى في خرابها أولئك ما كان لهم أن يدخلوها إلا خائفين لهم في الدنيا خزي ولهم في الآخرة عذاب عظيم
And who is more unjust than he who forbids that in places for the worship of Allah, Allah's name should be celebrated?-whose zeal is (in fact) to ruin them? It was not fitting that such should themselves enter them except in fear. For them there is nothing but disgrace in this world, and in the world to come, an exceeding torment.

ولله المشرق والمغرب فأينما تولوا فثم وجه الله إن الله واسع عليم
To Allah belong the east and the West: Whithersoever ye turn, there is the presence of Allah. For Allah is all-Pervading, all-Knowing.

وقالوا اتخذ الله ولدا سبحانه بل له ما في السماوات والأرض كل له قانتون
They say: "Allah hath begotten a son": Glory be to Him.-Nay, to Him belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth: everything renders worship to Him.

بديع السماوات والأرض وإذا قضى أمرا فإنما يقول له كن فيكون
To Him is due the primal origin of the heavens and the earth: When He decreeth a matter, He saith to it: "Be," and it is.

وقال الذين لا يعلمون لولا يكلمنا الله أو تأتينا آية كذلك قال الذين من قبلهم مثل قولهم تشابهت قلوبهم قد بينا الآيات لقوم يوقنون
Say those without knowledge: "Why speaketh not Allah unto us? or why cometh not unto us a Sign?" So said the people before them words of similar import. Their hearts are alike. We have indeed made clear the Signs unto any people who hold firmly to Faith (in their hearts).

إنا أرسلناك بالحق بشيرا ونذيرا ولا تسأل عن أصحاب الجحيم
Verily We have sent thee in truth as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner: But of thee no question shall be asked of the Companions of the Blazing Fire.

ولن ترضى عنك اليهود ولا النصارى حتى تتبع ملتهم قل إن هدى الله هو الهدى ولئن اتبعت أهواءهم بعد الذي جاءك من العلم ما لك من الله من ولي ولا نصير
Never will the Jews or the Christians be satisfied with thee unless thou follow their form of religion. Say: "The Guidance of Allah,-that is the (only) Guidance." Wert thou to follow their desires after the knowledge which hath reached thee, then wouldst thou find neither Protector nor helper against Allah.

الذين آتيناهم الكتاب يتلونه حق تلاوته أولئك يؤمنون به ومن يكفر به فأولئك هم الخاسرون
Those to whom We have sent the Book study it as it should be studied: They are the ones that believe therein: Those who reject faith therein,- the loss is their own.

يا بني إسرائيل اذكروا نعمتي التي أنعمت عليكم وأني فضلتكم على العالمين
O Children of Israel! call to mind the special favour which I bestowed upon you, and that I preferred you to all others (for My Message).

واتقوا يوما لا تجزي نفس عن نفس شيئا ولا يقبل منها عدل ولا تنفعها شفاعة ولا هم ينصرون
Then guard yourselves against a Day when one soul shall not avail another, nor shall compensation be accepted from her nor shall intercession profit her nor shall anyone be helped (from outside).

وإذ ابتلى إبراهيم ربه بكلمات فأتمهن قال إني جاعلك للناس إماما قال ومن ذريتي قال لا ينال عهدي الظالمين
And remember that Abraham was tried by his Lord with certain commands, which he fulfilled: He said: "I will make thee an Imam to the Nations." He pleaded: "And also (Imams) from my offspring!" He answered: "But My Promise is not within the reach of evil-doers."

وإذ جعلنا البيت مثابة للناس وأمنا واتخذوا من مقام إبراهيم مصلى وعهدنا إلى إبراهيم وإسماعيل أن طهرا بيتي للطائفين والعاكفين والركع السجود
Remember We made the House a place of assembly for men and a place of safety; and take ye the station of Abraham as a place of prayer; and We covenanted with Abraham and Isma'il, that they should sanctify My House for those who compass it round, or use it as a retreat, or bow, or prostrate themselves (therein in prayer).

وإذ قال إبراهيم رب اجعل هذا بلدا آمنا وارزق أهله من الثمرات من آمن منهم بالله واليوم الآخر قال ومن كفر فأمتعه قليلا ثم أضطره إلى عذاب النار وبئس المصير
And remember Abraham said: "My Lord, make this a City of Peace, and feed its people with fruits,-such of them as believe in Allah and the Last Day." He said: "(Yea), and such as reject Faith,-for a while will I grant them their pleasure, but will soon drive them to the torment of Fire,- an evil destination (indeed)!"

وإذ يرفع إبراهيم القواعد من البيت وإسماعيل ربنا تقبل منا إنك أنت السميع العليم
And remember Abraham and Isma'il raised the foundations of the House (With this prayer): "Our Lord! Accept (this service) from us: For Thou art the All-Hearing, the All-knowing.

ربنا واجعلنا مسلمين لك ومن ذريتنا أمة مسلمة لك وأرنا مناسكنا وتب علينا إنك أنت التواب الرحيم
"Our Lord! make of us Muslims, bowing to Thy (Will), and of our progeny a people Muslim, bowing to Thy (will); and show us our place for the celebration of (due) rites; and turn unto us (in Mercy); for Thou art the Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

ربنا وابعث فيهم رسولا منهم يتلو عليهم آياتك ويعلمهم الكتاب والحكمة ويزكيهم إنك أنت العزيز الحكيم
"Our Lord! send amongst them a Messenger of their own, who shall rehearse Thy Signs to them and instruct them in scripture and wisdom, and sanctify them: For Thou art the Exalted in Might, the Wise."

ومن يرغب عن ملة إبراهيم إلا من سفه نفسه ولقد اصطفيناه في الدنيا وإنه في الآخرة لمن الصالحين
And who turns away from the religion of Abraham but such as debase their souls with folly? Him We chose and rendered pure in this world: And he will be in the Hereafter in the ranks of the Righteous.

إذ قال له ربه أسلم قال أسلمت لرب العالمين
Behold! his Lord said to him: "Bow (thy will to Me):" He said: "I bow (my will) to the Lord and Cherisher of the Universe."

ووصى بها إبراهيم بنيه ويعقوب يا بني إن الله اصطفى لكم الدين فلا تموتن إلا وأنتم مسلمون
And this was the legacy that Abraham left to his sons, and so did Jacob; "Oh my sons! Allah hath chosen the Faith for you; then die not except in the Faith of Islam."

أم كنتم شهداء إذ حضر يعقوب الموت إذ قال لبنيه ما تعبدون من بعدي قالوا نعبد إلهك وإله آبائك إبراهيم وإسماعيل وإسحاق إلها واحدا ونحن له مسلمون
Were ye witnesses when death appeared before Jacob? Behold, he said to his sons: "What will ye worship after me?" They said: "We shall worship Thy god and the god of thy fathers, of Abraham, Isma'il and Isaac,- the one (True) Allah: To Him we bow (in Islam)."

تلك أمة قد خلت لها ما كسبت ولكم ما كسبتم ولا تسألون عما كانوا يعملون
That was a people that hath passed away. They shall reap the fruit of what they did, and ye of what ye do! Of their merits there is no question in your case!

وقالوا كونوا هودا أو نصارى تهتدوا قل بل ملة إبراهيم حنيفا وما كان من المشركين
They say: "Become Jews or Christians if ye would be guided (To salvation)." Say thou: "Nay! (I would rather) the Religion of Abraham the True, and he joined not gods with Allah."

قولوا آمنا بالله وما أنزل إلينا وما أنزل إلى إبراهيم وإسماعيل وإسحاق ويعقوب والأسباط وما أوتي موسى وعيسى وما أوتي النبيون من ربهم لا نفرق بين أحد منهم ونحن له مسلمون
Say ye: "We believe in Allah, and the revelation given to us, and to Abraham, Isma'il, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, and that given to Moses and Jesus, and that given to (all) prophets from their Lord: We make no difference between one and another of them: And we bow to Allah (in Islam)."

فإن آمنوا بمثل ما آمنتم به فقد اهتدوا وإن تولوا فإنما هم في شقاق فسيكفيكهم الله وهو السميع العليم
So if they believe as ye believe, they are indeed on the right path; but if they turn back, it is they who are in schism; but Allah will suffice thee as against them, and He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.

صبغة الله ومن أحسن من الله صبغة ونحن له عابدون
(Our religion is) the Baptism of Allah: And who can baptize better than Allah? And it is He Whom we worship.

قل أتحاجوننا في الله وهو ربنا وربكم ولنا أعمالنا ولكم أعمالكم ونحن له مخلصون
Say: Will ye dispute with us about Allah, seeing that He is our Lord and your Lord; that we are responsible for our doings and ye for yours; and that We are sincere (in our faith) in Him?

أم تقولون إن إبراهيم وإسماعيل وإسحاق ويعقوب والأسباط كانوا هودا أو نصارى قل أأنتم أعلم أم الله ومن أظلم ممن كتم شهادة عنده من الله وما الله بغافل عما تعملون
Or do ye say that Abraham, Isma'il Isaac, Jacob and the Tribes were Jews or Christians? Say: Do ye know better than Allah? Ah! who is more unjust than those who conceal the testimony they have from Allah? but Allah is not unmindful of what ye do!

تلك أمة قد خلت لها ما كسبت ولكم ما كسبتم ولا تسألون عما كانوا يعملون
That was a people that hath passed away. They shall reap the fruit of what they did, and ye of what ye do! Of their merits there is no question in your case:

سيقول السفهاء من الناس ما ولاهم عن قبلتهم التي كانوا عليها قل لله المشرق والمغرب يهدي من يشاء إلى صراط مستقيم
The fools among the people will say: "What hath turned them from the Qibla to which they were used?" Say: To Allah belong both east and West: He guideth whom He will to a Way that is straight.

وكذلك جعلناكم أمة وسطا لتكونوا شهداء على الناس ويكون الرسول عليكم شهيدا وما جعلنا القبلة التي كنت عليها إلا لنعلم من يتبع الرسول ممن ينقلب على عقبيه وإن كانت لكبيرة إلا على الذين هدى الله وما كان الله ليضيع إيمانكم إن الله بالناس لرءوف رحيم
Thus, have We made of you an Ummat justly balanced, that ye might be witnesses over the nations, and the Messenger a witness over yourselves; and We appointed the Qibla to which thou wast used, only to test those who followed the Messenger from those who would turn on their heels (From the Faith). Indeed it was (A change) momentous, except to those guided by Allah. And never would Allah Make your faith of no effect. For Allah is to all people Most surely full of kindness, Most Merciful.

قد نرى تقلب وجهك في السماء فلنولينك قبلة ترضاها فول وجهك شطر المسجد الحرام وحيث ما كنتم فولوا وجوهكم شطره وإن الذين أوتوا الكتاب ليعلمون أنه الحق من ربهم وما الله بغافل عما يعملون
We see the turning of thy face (for guidance to the heavens: now Shall We turn thee to a Qibla that shall please thee. Turn then Thy face in the direction of the sacred Mosque: Wherever ye are, turn your faces in that direction. The people of the Book know well that that is the truth from their Lord. Nor is Allah unmindful of what they do.

ولئن أتيت الذين أوتوا الكتاب بكل آية ما تبعوا قبلتك وما أنت بتابع قبلتهم وما بعضهم بتابع قبلة بعض ولئن اتبعت أهواءهم من بعد ما جاءك من العلم إنك إذا لمن الظالمين
Even if thou wert to bring to the people of the Book all the Signs (together), they would not follow Thy Qibla; nor art thou going to follow their Qibla; nor indeed will they follow each other's Qibla. If thou after the knowledge hath reached thee, Wert to follow their (vain) desires,-then wert thou Indeed (clearly) in the wrong.

الذين آتيناهم الكتاب يعرفونه كما يعرفون أبناءهم وإن فريقا منهم ليكتمون الحق وهم يعلمون
The people of the Book know this as they know their own sons; but some of them conceal the truth which they themselves know.

الحق من ربك فلا تكونن من الممترين
The Truth is from thy Lord; so be not at all in doubt.

ولكل وجهة هو موليها فاستبقوا الخيرات أين ما تكونوا يأت بكم الله جميعا إن الله على كل شيء قدير
To each is a goal to which Allah turns him; then strive together (as in a race) Towards all that is good. Wheresoever ye are, Allah will bring you Together. For Allah Hath power over all things.

ومن حيث خرجت فول وجهك شطر المسجد الحرام وإنه للحق من ربك وما الله بغافل عما تعملون
From whencesoever Thou startest forth, turn Thy face in the direction of the sacred Mosque; that is indeed the truth from the Lord. And Allah is not unmindful of what ye do.

ومن حيث خرجت فول وجهك شطر المسجد الحرام وحيث ما كنتم فولوا وجوهكم شطره لئلا يكون للناس عليكم حجة إلا الذين ظلموا منهم فلا تخشوهم واخشوني ولأتم نعمتي عليكم ولعلكم تهتدون
So from whencesoever Thou startest forth, turn Thy face in the direction of the sacred Mosque; and wheresoever ye are, Turn your face thither: that there be no ground of dispute against you among the people, except those of them that are bent on wickedness; so fear them not, but fear Me; and that I may complete My favours on you, and ye May (consent to) be guided;

كما أرسلنا فيكم رسولا منكم يتلو عليكم آياتنا ويزكيكم ويعلمكم الكتاب والحكمة ويعلمكم ما لم تكونوا تعلمون
A similar (favour have ye already received) in that We have sent among you a Messenger of your own, rehearsing to you Our Signs, and sanctifying you, and instructing you in Scripture and Wisdom, and in new knowledge.

فاذكروني أذكركم واشكروا لي ولا تكفرون
Then do ye remember Me; I will remember you. Be grateful to Me, and reject not Faith.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا استعينوا بالصبر والصلاة إن الله مع الصابرين
O ye who believe! seek help with patient perseverance and prayer; for Allah is with those who patiently persevere.

ولا تقولوا لمن يقتل في سبيل الله أموات بل أحياء ولكن لا تشعرون
And say not of those who are slain in the way of Allah: "They are dead." Nay, they are living, though ye perceive (it) not.

ولنبلونكم بشيء من الخوف والجوع ونقص من الأموال والأنفس والثمرات وبشر الصابرين
Be sure we shall test you with something of fear and hunger, some loss in goods or lives or the fruits (of your toil), but give glad tidings to those who patiently persevere,

الذين إذا أصابتهم مصيبة قالوا إنا لله وإنا إليه راجعون
Who say, when afflicted with calamity: "To Allah We belong, and to Him is our return":-

أولئك عليهم صلوات من ربهم ورحمة وأولئك هم المهتدون
They are those on whom (Descend) blessings from Allah, and Mercy, and they are the ones that receive guidance.

إن الصفا والمروة من شعائر الله فمن حج البيت أو اعتمر فلا جناح عليه أن يطوف بهما ومن تطوع خيرا فإن الله شاكر عليم
Behold! Safa and Marwa are among the Symbols of Allah. So if those who visit the House in the Season or at other times, should compass them round, it is no sin in them. And if any one obeyeth his own impulse to good,- be sure that Allah is He Who recogniseth and knoweth.

إن الذين يكتمون ما أنزلنا من البينات والهدى من بعد ما بيناه للناس في الكتاب أولئك يلعنهم الله ويلعنهم اللاعنون
Those who conceal the clear (Signs) We have sent down, and the Guidance, after We have made it clear for the people in the Book,-on them shall be Allah's curse, and the curse of those entitled to curse,-

إلا الذين تابوا وأصلحوا وبينوا فأولئك أتوب عليهم وأنا التواب الرحيم
Except those who repent and make amends and openly declare (the Truth): To them I turn; for I am Oft-returning, Most Merciful.

إن الذين كفروا وماتوا وهم كفار أولئك عليهم لعنة الله والملائكة والناس أجمعين
Those who reject Faith, and die rejecting,- on them is Allah's curse, and the curse of angels, and of all mankind;

خالدين فيها لا يخفف عنهم العذاب ولا هم ينظرون
They will abide therein: Their penalty will not be lightened, nor will respite be their (lot).

وإلهكم إله واحد لا إله إلا هو الرحمن الرحيم
And your Allah is One Allah: There is no god but He, Most Gracious, Most Merciful.

إن في خلق السماوات والأرض واختلاف الليل والنهار والفلك التي تجري في البحر بما ينفع الناس وما أنزل الله من السماء من ماء فأحيا به الأرض بعد موتها وبث فيها من كل دابة وتصريف الرياح والسحاب المسخر بين السماء والأرض لآيات لقوم يعقلون
Behold! in the creation of the heavens and the earth; in the alternation of the night and the day; in the sailing of the ships through the ocean for the profit of mankind; in the rain which Allah Sends down from the skies, and the life which He gives therewith to an earth that is dead; in the beasts of all kinds that He scatters through the earth; in the change of the winds, and the clouds which they Trail like their slaves between the sky and the earth;- (Here) indeed are Signs for a people that are wise.

ومن الناس من يتخذ من دون الله أندادا يحبونهم كحب الله والذين آمنوا أشد حبا لله ولو يرى الذين ظلموا إذ يرون العذاب أن القوة لله جميعا وأن الله شديد العذاب
Yet there are men who take (for worship) others besides Allah, as equal (with Allah): They love them as they should love Allah. But those of Faith are overflowing in their love for Allah. If only the unrighteous could see, behold, they would see the penalty: that to Allah belongs all power, and Allah will strongly enforce the penalty.

إذ تبرأ الذين اتبعوا من الذين اتبعوا ورأوا العذاب وتقطعت بهم الأسباب
Then would those who are followed clear themselves of those who follow (them): They would see the penalty, and all relations between them would be cut off.

وقال الذين اتبعوا لو أن لنا كرة فنتبرأ منهم كما تبرءوا منا كذلك يريهم الله أعمالهم حسرات عليهم وما هم بخارجين من النار
And those who followed would say: "If only We had one more chance, We would clear ourselves of them, as they have cleared themselves of us." Thus will Allah show them (The fruits of) their deeds as (nothing but) regrets. Nor will there be a way for them out of the Fire.

يا أيها الناس كلوا مما في الأرض حلالا طيبا ولا تتبعوا خطوات الشيطان إنه لكم عدو مبين
O ye people! Eat of what is on earth, Lawful and good; and do not follow the footsteps of the evil one, for he is to you an avowed enemy.

إنما يأمركم بالسوء والفحشاء وأن تقولوا على الله ما لا تعلمون
For he commands you what is evil and shameful, and that ye should say of Allah that of which ye have no knowledge.

وإذا قيل لهم اتبعوا ما أنزل الله قالوا بل نتبع ما ألفينا عليه آباءنا أولو كان آباؤهم لا يعقلون شيئا ولا يهتدون
When it is said to them: "Follow what Allah hath revealed:" They say: "Nay! we shall follow the ways of our fathers." What! even though their fathers Were void of wisdom and guidance?

ومثل الذين كفروا كمثل الذي ينعق بما لا يسمع إلا دعاء ونداء صم بكم عمي فهم لا يعقلون
The parable of those who reject Faith is as if one were to shout Like a goat-herd, to things that listen to nothing but calls and cries: Deaf, dumb, and blind, they are void of wisdom.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا كلوا من طيبات ما رزقناكم واشكروا لله إن كنتم إياه تعبدون
O ye who believe! Eat of the good things that We have provided for you, and be grateful to Allah, if it is Him ye worship.

إنما حرم عليكم الميتة والدم ولحم الخنزير وما أهل به لغير الله فمن اضطر غير باغ ولا عاد فلا إثم عليه إن الله غفور رحيم
He hath only forbidden you dead meat, and blood, and the flesh of swine, and that on which any other name hath been invoked besides that of Allah. But if one is forced by necessity, without wilful disobedience, nor transgressing due limits,- then is he guiltless. For Allah is Oft-forgiving Most Merciful.

إن الذين يكتمون ما أنزل الله من الكتاب ويشترون به ثمنا قليلا أولئك ما يأكلون في بطونهم إلا النار ولا يكلمهم الله يوم القيامة ولا يزكيهم ولهم عذاب أليم
Those who conceal Allah's revelations in the Book, and purchase for them a miserable profit,- they swallow into themselves naught but Fire; Allah will not address them on the Day of Resurrection. Nor purify them: Grievous will be their penalty.

أولئك الذين اشتروا الضلالة بالهدى والعذاب بالمغفرة فما أصبرهم على النار
They are the ones who buy Error in place of Guidance and Torment in place of Forgiveness. Ah! what boldness (They show) for the Fire!

ذلك بأن الله نزل الكتاب بالحق وإن الذين اختلفوا في الكتاب لفي شقاق بعيد
(Their doom is) because Allah sent down the Book in truth but those who seek causes of dispute in the Book are in a schism Far (from the purpose).

ليس البر أن تولوا وجوهكم قبل المشرق والمغرب ولكن البر من آمن بالله واليوم الآخر والملائكة والكتاب والنبيين وآتى المال على حبه ذوي القربى واليتامى والمساكين وابن السبيل والسائلين وفي الرقاب وأقام الصلاة وآتى الزكاة والموفون بعهدهم إذا عاهدوا والصابرين في البأساء والضراء وحين البأس أولئك الذين صدقوا وأولئك هم المتقون
It is not righteousness that ye turn your faces Towards east or West; but it is righteousness- to believe in Allah and the Last Day, and the Angels, and the Book, and the Messengers; to spend of your substance, out of love for Him, for your kin, for orphans, for the needy, for the wayfarer, for those who ask, and for the ransom of slaves; to be steadfast in prayer, and practice regular charity; to fulfil the contracts which ye have made; and to be firm and patient, in pain (or suffering) and adversity, and throughout all periods of panic. Such are the people of truth, the Allah-fearing.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا كتب عليكم القصاص في القتلى الحر بالحر والعبد بالعبد والأنثى بالأنثى فمن عفي له من أخيه شيء فاتباع بالمعروف وأداء إليه بإحسان ذلك تخفيف من ربكم ورحمة فمن اعتدى بعد ذلك فله عذاب أليم
O ye who believe! the law of equality is prescribed to you in cases of murder: the free for the free, the slave for the slave, the woman for the woman. But if any remission is made by the brother of the slain, then grant any reasonable demand, and compensate him with handsome gratitude, this is a concession and a Mercy from your Lord. After this whoever exceeds the limits shall be in grave penalty.

ولكم في القصاص حياة يا أولي الألباب لعلكم تتقون
In the Law of Equality there is (saving of) Life to you, o ye men of understanding; that ye may restrain yourselves.

كتب عليكم إذا حضر أحدكم الموت إن ترك خيرا الوصية للوالدين والأقربين بالمعروف حقا على المتقين
It is prescribed, when death approaches any of you, if he leave any goods that he make a bequest to parents and next of kin, according to reasonable usage; this is due from the Allah-fearing.

فمن بدله بعد ما سمعه فإنما إثمه على الذين يبدلونه إن الله سميع عليم
If anyone changes the bequest after hearing it, the guilt shall be on those who make the change. For Allah hears and knows (All things).

فمن خاف من موص جنفا أو إثما فأصلح بينهم فلا إثم عليه إن الله غفور رحيم
But if anyone fears partiality or wrong-doing on the part of the testator, and makes peace between (The parties concerned), there is no wrong in him: For Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا كتب عليكم الصيام كما كتب على الذين من قبلكم لعلكم تتقون
O ye who believe! Fasting is prescribed to you as it was prescribed to those before you, that ye may (learn) self-restraint,-

أياما معدودات فمن كان منكم مريضا أو على سفر فعدة من أيام أخر وعلى الذين يطيقونه فدية طعام مسكين فمن تطوع خيرا فهو خير له وأن تصوموا خير لكم إن كنتم تعلمون
(Fasting) for a fixed number of days; but if any of you is ill, or on a journey, the prescribed number (Should be made up) from days later. For those who can do it (With hardship), is a ransom, the feeding of one that is indigent. But he that will give more, of his own free will,- it is better for him. And it is better for you that ye fast, if ye only knew.

شهر رمضان الذي أنزل فيه القرآن هدى للناس وبينات من الهدى والفرقان فمن شهد منكم الشهر فليصمه ومن كان مريضا أو على سفر فعدة من أيام أخر يريد الله بكم اليسر ولا يريد بكم العسر ولتكملوا العدة ولتكبروا الله على ما هداكم ولعلكم تشكرون
Ramadhan is the (month) in which was sent down the Qur'an, as a guide to mankind, also clear (Signs) for guidance and judgment (Between right and wrong). So every one of you who is present (at his home) during that month should spend it in fasting, but if any one is ill, or on a journey, the prescribed period (Should be made up) by days later. Allah intends every facility for you; He does not want to put to difficulties. (He wants you) to complete the prescribed period, and to glorify Him in that He has guided you; and perchance ye shall be grateful.

وإذا سألك عبادي عني فإني قريب أجيب دعوة الداع إذا دعان فليستجيبوا لي وليؤمنوا بي لعلهم يرشدون
When My servants ask thee concerning Me, I am indeed close (to them): I listen to the prayer of every suppliant when he calleth on Me: Let them also, with a will, Listen to My call, and believe in Me: That they may walk in the right way.

أحل لكم ليلة الصيام الرفث إلى نسائكم هن لباس لكم وأنتم لباس لهن علم الله أنكم كنتم تختانون أنفسكم فتاب عليكم وعفا عنكم فالآن باشروهن وابتغوا ما كتب الله لكم وكلوا واشربوا حتى يتبين لكم الخيط الأبيض من الخيط الأسود من الفجر ثم أتموا الصيام إلى الليل ولا تباشروهن وأنتم عاكفون في المساجد تلك حدود الله فلا تقربوها كذلك يبين الله آياته للناس لعلهم يتقون
Permitted to you, on the night of the fasts, is the approach to your wives. They are your garments and ye are their garments. Allah knoweth what ye used to do secretly among yourselves; but He turned to you and forgave you; so now associate with them, and seek what Allah Hath ordained for you, and eat and drink, until the white thread of dawn appear to you distinct from its black thread; then complete your fast Till the night appears; but do not associate with your wives while ye are in retreat in the mosques. Those are Limits (set by) Allah: Approach not nigh thereto. Thus doth Allah make clear His Signs to men: that they may learn self-restraint.

ولا تأكلوا أموالكم بينكم بالباطل وتدلوا بها إلى الحكام لتأكلوا فريقا من أموال الناس بالإثم وأنتم تعلمون
And do not eat up your property among yourselves for vanities, nor use it as bait for the judges, with intent that ye may eat up wrongfully and knowingly a little of (other) people's property.

يسألونك عن الأهلة قل هي مواقيت للناس والحج وليس البر بأن تأتوا البيوت من ظهورها ولكن البر من اتقى وأتوا البيوت من أبوابها واتقوا الله لعلكم تفلحون
They ask thee concerning the New Moons. Say: They are but signs to mark fixed periods of time in (the affairs of) men, and for Pilgrimage. It is no virtue if ye enter your houses from the back: It is virtue if ye fear Allah. Enter houses through the proper doors: And fear Allah: That ye may prosper.

وقاتلوا في سبيل الله الذين يقاتلونكم ولا تعتدوا إن الله لا يحب المعتدين
Fight in the cause of Allah those who fight you, but do not transgress limits; for Allah loveth not transgressors.

واقتلوهم حيث ثقفتموهم وأخرجوهم من حيث أخرجوكم والفتنة أشد من القتل ولا تقاتلوهم عند المسجد الحرام حتى يقاتلوكم فيه فإن قاتلوكم فاقتلوهم كذلك جزاء الكافرين
And slay them wherever ye catch them, and turn them out from where they have Turned you out; for tumult and oppression are worse than slaughter; but fight them not at the Sacred Mosque, unless they (first) fight you there; but if they fight you, slay them. Such is the reward of those who suppress faith.

فإن انتهوا فإن الله غفور رحيم
But if they cease, Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

وقاتلوهم حتى لا تكون فتنة ويكون الدين لله فإن انتهوا فلا عدوان إلا على الظالمين
And fight them on until there is no more Tumult or oppression, and there prevail justice and faith in Allah; but if they cease, Let there be no hostility except to those who practise oppression.

الشهر الحرام بالشهر الحرام والحرمات قصاص فمن اعتدى عليكم فاعتدوا عليه بمثل ما اعتدى عليكم واتقوا الله واعلموا أن الله مع المتقين
The prohibited month for the prohibited month,- and so for all things prohibited,- there is the law of equality. If then any one transgresses the prohibition against you, Transgress ye likewise against him. But fear Allah, and know that Allah is with those who restrain themselves.

وأنفقوا في سبيل الله ولا تلقوا بأيديكم إلى التهلكة وأحسنوا إن الله يحب المحسنين
And spend of your substance in the cause of Allah, and make not your own hands contribute to (your) destruction; but do good; for Allah loveth those who do good.

وأتموا الحج والعمرة لله فإن أحصرتم فما استيسر من الهدي ولا تحلقوا رءوسكم حتى يبلغ الهدي محله فمن كان منكم مريضا أو به أذى من رأسه ففدية من صيام أو صدقة أو نسك فإذا أمنتم فمن تمتع بالعمرة إلى الحج فما استيسر من الهدي فمن لم يجد فصيام ثلاثة أيام في الحج وسبعة إذا رجعتم تلك عشرة كاملة ذلك لمن لم يكن أهله حاضري المسجد الحرام واتقوا الله واعلموا أن الله شديد العقاب
And complete the Hajj or 'umra in the service of Allah. But if ye are prevented (From completing it), send an offering for sacrifice, such as ye may find, and do not shave your heads until the offering reaches the place of sacrifice. And if any of you is ill, or has an ailment in his scalp, (Necessitating shaving), (He should) in compensation either fast, or feed the poor, or offer sacrifice; and when ye are in peaceful conditions (again), if any one wishes to continue the 'umra on to the hajj, He must make an offering, such as he can afford, but if he cannot afford it, He should fast three days during the hajj and seven days on his return, Making ten days in all. This is for those whose household is not in (the precincts of) the Sacred Mosque. And fear Allah, and know that Allah Is strict in punishment.

الحج أشهر معلومات فمن فرض فيهن الحج فلا رفث ولا فسوق ولا جدال في الحج وما تفعلوا من خير يعلمه الله وتزودوا فإن خير الزاد التقوى واتقون يا أولي الألباب
For Hajj are the months well known. If any one undertakes that duty therein, Let there be no obscenity, nor wickedness, nor wrangling in the Hajj. And whatever good ye do, (be sure) Allah knoweth it. And take a provision (With you) for the journey, but the best of provisions is right conduct. So fear Me, o ye that are wise.

ليس عليكم جناح أن تبتغوا فضلا من ربكم فإذا أفضتم من عرفات فاذكروا الله عند المشعر الحرام واذكروه كما هداكم وإن كنتم من قبله لمن الضالين
It is no crime in you if ye seek of the bounty of your Lord (during pilgrimage). Then when ye pour down from (Mount) Arafat, celebrate the praises of Allah at the Sacred Monument, and celebrate His praises as He has directed you, even though, before this, ye went astray.

ثم أفيضوا من حيث أفاض الناس واستغفروا الله إن الله غفور رحيم
Then pass on at a quick pace from the place whence it is usual for the multitude so to do, and ask for Allah's forgiveness. For Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

فإذا قضيتم مناسككم فاذكروا الله كذكركم آباءكم أو أشد ذكرا فمن الناس من يقول ربنا آتنا في الدنيا وما له في الآخرة من خلاق
So when ye have accomplished your holy rites, celebrate the praises of Allah, as ye used to celebrate the praises of your fathers,- yea, with far more Heart and soul. There are men who say: "Our Lord! Give us (Thy bounties) in this world!" but they will have no portion in the Hereafter.

ومنهم من يقول ربنا آتنا في الدنيا حسنة وفي الآخرة حسنة وقنا عذاب النار
And there are men who say: "Our Lord! Give us good in this world and good in the Hereafter, and defend us from the torment of the Fire!"

أولئك لهم نصيب مما كسبوا والله سريع الحساب
To these will be allotted what they have earned; and Allah is quick in account.

واذكروا الله في أيام معدودات فمن تعجل في يومين فلا إثم عليه ومن تأخر فلا إثم عليه لمن اتقى واتقوا الله واعلموا أنكم إليه تحشرون
Celebrate the praises of Allah during the Appointed Days. But if any one hastens to leave in two days, there is no blame on him, and if any one stays on, there is no blame on him, if his aim is to do right. Then fear Allah, and know that ye will surely be gathered unto Him.

ومن الناس من يعجبك قوله في الحياة الدنيا ويشهد الله على ما في قلبه وهو ألد الخصام
There is the type of man whose speech about this world's life May dazzle thee, and he calls Allah to witness about what is in his heart; yet is he the most contentious of enemies.

وإذا تولى سعى في الأرض ليفسد فيها ويهلك الحرث والنسل والله لا يحب الفساد
When he turns his back, His aim everywhere is to spread mischief through the earth and destroy crops and cattle. But Allah loveth not mischief.

وإذا قيل له اتق الله أخذته العزة بالإثم فحسبه جهنم ولبئس المهاد
When it is said to him, "Fear Allah", He is led by arrogance to (more) crime. Enough for him is Hell;-An evil bed indeed (To lie on)!

ومن الناس من يشري نفسه ابتغاء مرضات الله والله رءوف بالعباد
And there is the type of man who gives his life to earn the pleasure of Allah: And Allah is full of kindness to (His) devotees.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا ادخلوا في السلم كافة ولا تتبعوا خطوات الشيطان إنه لكم عدو مبين
O ye who believe! Enter into Islam whole-heartedly; and follow not the footsteps of the evil one; for he is to you an avowed enemy.

فإن زللتم من بعد ما جاءتكم البينات فاعلموا أن الله عزيز حكيم
If ye backslide after the clear (Signs) have come to you, then know that Allah is Exalted in Power, Wise.

هل ينظرون إلا أن يأتيهم الله في ظلل من الغمام والملائكة وقضي الأمر وإلى الله ترجع الأمور
Will they wait until Allah comes to them in canopies of clouds, with angels (in His train) and the question is (thus) settled? but to Allah do all questions go back (for decision).

سل بني إسرائيل كم آتيناهم من آية بينة ومن يبدل نعمة الله من بعد ما جاءته فإن الله شديد العقاب
Ask the Children of Israel how many clear (Signs) We have sent them. But if any one, after Allah's favour has come to him, substitutes (something else), Allah is strict in punishment.

زين للذين كفروا الحياة الدنيا ويسخرون من الذين آمنوا والذين اتقوا فوقهم يوم القيامة والله يرزق من يشاء بغير حساب
The life of this world is alluring to those who reject faith, and they scoff at those who believe. But the righteous will be above them on the Day of Resurrection; for Allah bestows His abundance without measure on whom He will.

كان الناس أمة واحدة فبعث الله النبيين مبشرين ومنذرين وأنزل معهم الكتاب بالحق ليحكم بين الناس فيما اختلفوا فيه وما اختلف فيه إلا الذين أوتوه من بعد ما جاءتهم البينات بغيا بينهم فهدى الله الذين آمنوا لما اختلفوا فيه من الحق بإذنه والله يهدي من يشاء إلى صراط مستقيم
Mankind was one single nation, and Allah sent Messengers with glad tidings and warnings; and with them He sent the Book in truth, to judge between people in matters wherein they differed; but the People of the Book, after the clear Signs came to them, did not differ among themselves, except through selfish contumacy. Allah by His Grace Guided the believers to the Truth, concerning that wherein they differed. For Allah guided whom He will to a path that is straight.

أم حسبتم أن تدخلوا الجنة ولما يأتكم مثل الذين خلوا من قبلكم مستهم البأساء والضراء وزلزلوا حتى يقول الرسول والذين آمنوا معه متى نصر الله ألا إن نصر الله قريب
Or do ye think that ye shall enter the Garden (of bliss) without such (trials) as came to those who passed away before you? they encountered suffering and adversity, and were so shaken in spirit that even the Messenger and those of faith who were with him cried: "When (will come) the help of Allah?" Ah! Verily, the help of Allah is (always) near!

يسألونك ماذا ينفقون قل ما أنفقتم من خير فللوالدين والأقربين واليتامى والمساكين وابن السبيل وما تفعلوا من خير فإن الله به عليم
They ask thee what they should spend (In charity). Say: Whatever ye spend that is good, is for parents and kindred and orphans and those in want and for wayfarers. And whatever ye do that is good, -Allah knoweth it well.

كتب عليكم القتال وهو كره لكم وعسى أن تكرهوا شيئا وهو خير لكم وعسى أن تحبوا شيئا وهو شر لكم والله يعلم وأنتم لا تعلمون
Fighting is prescribed for you, and ye dislike it. But it is possible that ye dislike a thing which is good for you, and that ye love a thing which is bad for you. But Allah knoweth, and ye know not.

يسألونك عن الشهر الحرام قتال فيه قل قتال فيه كبير وصد عن سبيل الله وكفر به والمسجد الحرام وإخراج أهله منه أكبر عند الله والفتنة أكبر من القتل ولا يزالون يقاتلونكم حتى يردوكم عن دينكم إن استطاعوا ومن يرتدد منكم عن دينه فيمت وهو كافر فأولئك حبطت أعمالهم في الدنيا والآخرة وأولئك أصحاب النار هم فيها خالدون
They ask thee concerning fighting in the Prohibited Month. Say: "Fighting therein is a grave (offence); but graver is it in the sight of Allah to prevent access to the path of Allah, to deny Him, to prevent access to the Sacred Mosque, and drive out its members." Tumult and oppression are worse than slaughter. Nor will they cease fighting you until they turn you back from your faith if they can. And if any of you Turn back from their faith and die in unbelief, their works will bear no fruit in this life and in the Hereafter; they will be companions of the Fire and will abide therein.

إن الذين آمنوا والذين هاجروا وجاهدوا في سبيل الله أولئك يرجون رحمت الله والله غفور رحيم
Those who believed and those who suffered exile and fought (and strove and struggled) in the path of Allah,- they have the hope of the Mercy of Allah: And Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

يسألونك عن الخمر والميسر قل فيهما إثم كبير ومنافع للناس وإثمهما أكبر من نفعهما ويسألونك ماذا ينفقون قل العفو كذلك يبين الله لكم الآيات لعلكم تتفكرون
They ask thee concerning wine and gambling. Say: "In them is great sin, and some profit, for men; but the sin is greater than the profit." They ask thee how much they are to spend; Say: "What is beyond your needs." Thus doth Allah Make clear to you His Signs: In order that ye may consider-

في الدنيا والآخرة ويسألونك عن اليتامى قل إصلاح لهم خير وإن تخالطوهم فإخوانكم والله يعلم المفسد من المصلح ولو شاء الله لأعنتكم إن الله عزيز حكيم
(Their bearings) on this life and the Hereafter. They ask thee concerning orphans. Say: "The best thing to do is what is for their good; if ye mix their affairs with yours, they are your brethren; but Allah knows the man who means mischief from the man who means good. And if Allah had wished, He could have put you into difficulties: He is indeed Exalted in Power, Wise."

ولا تنكحوا المشركات حتى يؤمن ولأمة مؤمنة خير من مشركة ولو أعجبتكم ولا تنكحوا المشركين حتى يؤمنوا ولعبد مؤمن خير من مشرك ولو أعجبكم أولئك يدعون إلى النار والله يدعو إلى الجنة والمغفرة بإذنه ويبين آياته للناس لعلهم يتذكرون
Do not marry unbelieving women (idolaters), until they believe: A slave woman who believes is better than an unbelieving woman, even though she allures you. Nor marry (your girls) to unbelievers until they believe: A man slave who believes is better than an unbeliever, even though he allures you. Unbelievers do (but) beckon you to the Fire. But Allah beckons by His Grace to the Garden (of bliss) and forgiveness, and makes His Signs clear to mankind: That they may celebrate His praise.

ويسألونك عن المحيض قل هو أذى فاعتزلوا النساء في المحيض ولا تقربوهن حتى يطهرن فإذا تطهرن فأتوهن من حيث أمركم الله إن الله يحب التوابين ويحب المتطهرين
They ask thee concerning women's courses. Say: They are a hurt and a pollution: So keep away from women in their courses, and do not approach them until they are clean. But when they have purified themselves, ye may approach them in any manner, time, or place ordained for you by Allah. For Allah loves those who turn to Him constantly and He loves those who keep themselves pure and clean.

نساؤكم حرث لكم فأتوا حرثكم أنى شئتم وقدموا لأنفسكم واتقوا الله واعلموا أنكم ملاقوه وبشر المؤمنين
Your wives are as a tilth unto you; so approach your tilth when or how ye will; but do some good act for your souls beforehand; and fear Allah. And know that ye are to meet Him (in the Hereafter), and give (these) good tidings to those who believe.

ولا تجعلوا الله عرضة لأيمانكم أن تبروا وتتقوا وتصلحوا بين الناس والله سميع عليم
And make not Allah's (name) an excuse in your oaths against doing good, or acting rightly, or making peace between persons; for Allah is One Who heareth and knoweth all things.

لا يؤاخذكم الله باللغو في أيمانكم ولكن يؤاخذكم بما كسبت قلوبكم والله غفور حليم
Allah will not call you to account for thoughtlessness in your oaths, but for the intention in your hearts; and He is Oft-forgiving, Most Forbearing.

للذين يؤلون من نسائهم تربص أربعة أشهر فإن فاءوا فإن الله غفور رحيم
For those who take an oath for abstention from their wives, a waiting for four months is ordained; if then they return, Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

وإن عزموا الطلاق فإن الله سميع عليم
But if their intention is firm for divorce, Allah heareth and knoweth all things.

والمطلقات يتربصن بأنفسهن ثلاثة قروء ولا يحل لهن أن يكتمن ما خلق الله في أرحامهن إن كن يؤمن بالله واليوم الآخر وبعولتهن أحق بردهن في ذلك إن أرادوا إصلاحا ولهن مثل الذي عليهن بالمعروف وللرجال عليهن درجة والله عزيز حكيم
Divorced women shall wait concerning themselves for three monthly periods. Nor is it lawful for them to hide what Allah Hath created in their wombs, if they have faith in Allah and the Last Day. And their husbands have the better right to take them back in that period, if they wish for reconciliation. And women shall have rights similar to the rights against them, according to what is equitable; but men have a degree (of advantage) over them. And Allah is Exalted in Power, Wise.

الطلاق مرتان فإمساك بمعروف أو تسريح بإحسان ولا يحل لكم أن تأخذوا مما آتيتموهن شيئا إلا أن يخافا ألا يقيما حدود الله فإن خفتم ألا يقيما حدود الله فلا جناح عليهما فيما افتدت به تلك حدود الله فلا تعتدوها ومن يتعد حدود الله فأولئك هم الظالمون
A divorce is only permissible twice: after that, the parties should either hold Together on equitable terms, or separate with kindness. It is not lawful for you, (Men), to take back any of your gifts (from your wives), except when both parties fear that they would be unable to keep the limits ordained by Allah. If ye (judges) do indeed fear that they would be unable to keep the limits ordained by Allah, there is no blame on either of them if she give something for her freedom. These are the limits ordained by Allah; so do not transgress them if any do transgress the limits ordained by Allah, such persons wrong (Themselves as well as others).

فإن طلقها فلا تحل له من بعد حتى تنكح زوجا غيره فإن طلقها فلا جناح عليهما أن يتراجعا إن ظنا أن يقيما حدود الله وتلك حدود الله يبينها لقوم يعلمون
So if a husband divorces his wife (irrevocably), He cannot, after that, re-marry her until after she has married another husband and He has divorced her. In that case there is no blame on either of them if they re-unite, provided they feel that they can keep the limits ordained by Allah. Such are the limits ordained by Allah, which He makes plain to those who understand.

وإذا طلقتم النساء فبلغن أجلهن فأمسكوهن بمعروف أو سرحوهن بمعروف ولا تمسكوهن ضرارا لتعتدوا ومن يفعل ذلك فقد ظلم نفسه ولا تتخذوا آيات الله هزوا واذكروا نعمت الله عليكم وما أنزل عليكم من الكتاب والحكمة يعظكم به واتقوا الله واعلموا أن الله بكل شيء عليم
When ye divorce women, and they fulfil the term of their ('Iddat), either take them back on equitable terms or set them free on equitable terms; but do not take them back to injure them, (or) to take undue advantage; if any one does that; He wrongs his own soul. Do not treat Allah's Signs as a jest, but solemnly rehearse Allah's favours on you, and the fact that He sent down to you the Book and Wisdom, for your instruction. And fear Allah, and know that Allah is well acquainted with all things.

وإذا طلقتم النساء فبلغن أجلهن فلا تعضلوهن أن ينكحن أزواجهن إذا تراضوا بينهم بالمعروف ذلك يوعظ به من كان منكم يؤمن بالله واليوم الآخر ذلكم أزكى لكم وأطهر والله يعلم وأنتم لا تعلمون
When ye divorce women, and they fulfil the term of their ('Iddat), do not prevent them from marrying their (former) husbands, if they mutually agree on equitable terms. This instruction is for all amongst you, who believe in Allah and the Last Day. That is (the course Making for) most virtue and purity amongst you and Allah knows, and ye know not.

والوالدات يرضعن أولادهن حولين كاملين لمن أراد أن يتم الرضاعة وعلى المولود له رزقهن وكسوتهن بالمعروف لا تكلف نفس إلا وسعها لا تضار والدة بولدها ولا مولود له بولده وعلى الوارث مثل ذلك فإن أرادا فصالا عن تراض منهما وتشاور فلا جناح عليهما وإن أردتم أن تسترضعوا أولادكم فلا جناح عليكم إذا سلمتم ما آتيتم بالمعروف واتقوا الله واعلموا أن الله بما تعملون بصير
The mothers shall give such to their offspring for two whole years, if the father desires to complete the term. But he shall bear the cost of their food and clothing on equitable terms. No soul shall have a burden laid on it greater than it can bear. No mother shall be Treated unfairly on account of her child. Nor father on account of his child, an heir shall be chargeable in the same way. If they both decide on weaning, by mutual consent, and after due consultation, there is no blame on them. If ye decide on a foster-mother for your offspring, there is no blame on you, provided ye pay (the mother) what ye offered, on equitable terms. But fear Allah and know that Allah sees well what ye do.

والذين يتوفون منكم ويذرون أزواجا يتربصن بأنفسهن أربعة أشهر وعشرا فإذا بلغن أجلهن فلا جناح عليكم فيما فعلن في أنفسهن بالمعروف والله بما تعملون خبير
If any of you die and leave widows behind, they shall wait concerning themselves four months and ten days: When they have fulfilled their term, there is no blame on you if they dispose of themselves in a just and reasonable manner. And Allah is well acquainted with what ye do.

ولا جناح عليكم فيما عرضتم به من خطبة النساء أو أكننتم في أنفسكم علم الله أنكم ستذكرونهن ولكن لا تواعدوهن سرا إلا أن تقولوا قولا معروفا ولا تعزموا عقدة النكاح حتى يبلغ الكتاب أجله واعلموا أن الله يعلم ما في أنفسكم فاحذروه واعلموا أن الله غفور حليم
There is no blame on you if ye make an offer of betrothal or hold it in your hearts. Allah knows that ye cherish them in your hearts: But do not make a secret contract with them except in terms Honourable, nor resolve on the tie of marriage till the term prescribed is fulfilled. And know that Allah Knoweth what is in your hearts, and take heed of Him; and know that Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Forbearing.

لا جناح عليكم إن طلقتم النساء ما لم تمسوهن أو تفرضوا لهن فريضة ومتعوهن على الموسع قدره وعلى المقتر قدره متاعا بالمعروف حقا على المحسنين
There is no blame on you if ye divorce women before consummation or the fixation of their dower; but bestow on them (A suitable gift), the wealthy according to his means, and the poor according to his means;- A gift of a reasonable amount is due from those who wish to do the right thing.

وإن طلقتموهن من قبل أن تمسوهن وقد فرضتم لهن فريضة فنصف ما فرضتم إلا أن يعفون أو يعفو الذي بيده عقدة النكاح وأن تعفوا أقرب للتقوى ولا تنسوا الفضل بينكم إن الله بما تعملون بصير
And if ye divorce them before consummation, but after the fixation of a dower for them, then the half of the dower (Is due to them), unless they remit it or (the man's half) is remitted by him in whose hands is the marriage tie; and the remission (of the man's half) is the nearest to righteousness. And do not forget Liberality between yourselves. For Allah sees well all that ye do.

حافظوا على الصلوات والصلاة الوسطى وقوموا لله قانتين
Guard strictly your (habit of) prayers, especially the Middle Prayer; and stand before Allah in a devout (frame of mind).

فإن خفتم فرجالا أو ركبانا فإذا أمنتم فاذكروا الله كما علمكم ما لم تكونوا تعلمون
If ye fear (an enemy), pray on foot, or riding, (as may be most convenient), but when ye are in security, celebrate Allah's praises in the manner He has taught you, which ye knew not (before).

والذين يتوفون منكم ويذرون أزواجا وصية لأزواجهم متاعا إلى الحول غير إخراج فإن خرجن فلا جناح عليكم في ما فعلن في أنفسهن من معروف والله عزيز حكيم
Those of you who die and leave widows should bequeath for their widows a year's maintenance and residence; but if they leave (The residence), there is no blame on you for what they do with themselves, provided it is reasonable. And Allah is Exalted in Power, Wise.

وللمطلقات متاع بالمعروف حقا على المتقين
For divorced women Maintenance (should be provided) on a reasonable (scale). This is a duty on the righteous.

كذلك يبين الله لكم آياته لعلكم تعقلون
Thus doth Allah Make clear His Signs to you: In order that ye may understand.

ألم تر إلى الذين خرجوا من ديارهم وهم ألوف حذر الموت فقال لهم الله موتوا ثم أحياهم إن الله لذو فضل على الناس ولكن أكثر الناس لا يشكرون
Didst thou not Turn by vision to those who abandoned their homes, though they were thousands (In number), for fear of death? Allah said to them: "Die": Then He restored them to life. For Allah is full of bounty to mankind, but Most of them are ungrateful.

وقاتلوا في سبيل الله واعلموا أن الله سميع عليم
Then fight in the cause of Allah, and know that Allah Heareth and knoweth all things.

من ذا الذي يقرض الله قرضا حسنا فيضاعفه له أضعافا كثيرة والله يقبض ويبسط وإليه ترجعون
Who is he that will loan to Allah a beautiful loan, which Allah will double unto his credit and multiply many times? It is Allah that giveth (you) Want or plenty, and to Him shall be your return.

ألم تر إلى الملإ من بني إسرائيل من بعد موسى إذ قالوا لنبي لهم ابعث لنا ملكا نقاتل في سبيل الله قال هل عسيتم إن كتب عليكم القتال ألا تقاتلوا قالوا وما لنا ألا نقاتل في سبيل الله وقد أخرجنا من ديارنا وأبنائنا فلما كتب عليهم القتال تولوا إلا قليلا منهم والله عليم بالظالمين
Hast thou not Turned thy vision to the Chiefs of the Children of Israel after (the time of) Moses? they said to a prophet (That was) among them: "Appoint for us a king, that we May fight in the cause of Allah." He said: "Is it not possible, if ye were commanded to fight, that that ye will not fight?" They said: "How could we refuse to fight in the cause of Allah, seeing that we were turned out of our homes and our families?" but when they were commanded to fight, they turned back, except a small band among them. But Allah Has full knowledge of those who do wrong.

وقال لهم نبيهم إن الله قد بعث لكم طالوت ملكا قالوا أنى يكون له الملك علينا ونحن أحق بالملك منه ولم يؤت سعة من المال قال إن الله اصطفاه عليكم وزاده بسطة في العلم والجسم والله يؤتي ملكه من يشاء والله واسع عليم
Their Prophet said to them: "Allah hath appointed Talut as king over you." They said: "How can he exercise authority over us when we are better fitted than he to exercise authority, and he is not even gifted, with wealth in abundance?" He said: "Allah hath Chosen him above you, and hath gifted him abundantly with knowledge and bodily prowess: Allah Granteth His authority to whom He pleaseth. Allah careth for all, and He knoweth all things."

وقال لهم نبيهم إن آية ملكه أن يأتيكم التابوت فيه سكينة من ربكم وبقية مما ترك آل موسى وآل هارون تحمله الملائكة إن في ذلك لآية لكم إن كنتم مؤمنين
And (further) their Prophet said to them: "A Sign of his authority is that there shall come to you the Ark of the covenant, with (an assurance) therein of security from your Lord, and the relics left by the family of Moses and the family of Aaron, carried by angels. In this is a symbol for you if ye indeed have faith."

فلما فصل طالوت بالجنود قال إن الله مبتليكم بنهر فمن شرب منه فليس مني ومن لم يطعمه فإنه مني إلا من اغترف غرفة بيده فشربوا منه إلا قليلا منهم فلما جاوزه هو والذين آمنوا معه قالوا لا طاقة لنا اليوم بجالوت وجنوده قال الذين يظنون أنهم ملاقو الله كم من فئة قليلة غلبت فئة كثيرة بإذن الله والله مع الصابرين
When Talut set forth with the armies, he said: "Allah will test you at the stream: if any drinks of its water, He goes not with my army: Only those who taste not of it go with me: A mere sip out of the hand is excused." but they all drank of it, except a few. When they crossed the river,- He and the faithful ones with him,- they said: "This day We cannot cope with Goliath and his forces." but those who were convinced that they must meet Allah, said: "How oft, by Allah's will, Hath a small force vanquished a big one? Allah is with those who steadfastly persevere."

ولما برزوا لجالوت وجنوده قالوا ربنا أفرغ علينا صبرا وثبت أقدامنا وانصرنا على القوم الكافرين
When they advanced to meet Goliath and his forces, they prayed: "Our Lord! Pour out constancy on us and make our steps firm: Help us against those that reject faith."

فهزموهم بإذن الله وقتل داوود جالوت وآتاه الله الملك والحكمة وعلمه مما يشاء ولولا دفع الله الناس بعضهم ببعض لفسدت الأرض ولكن الله ذو فضل على العالمين
By Allah's will they routed them; and David slew Goliath; and Allah gave him power and wisdom and taught him whatever (else) He willed. And did not Allah Check one set of people by means of another, the earth would indeed be full of mischief: But Allah is full of bounty to all the worlds.

تلك آيات الله نتلوها عليك بالحق وإنك لمن المرسلين
These are the Signs of Allah: we rehearse them to thee in truth: verily Thou art one of the messengers.

تلك الرسل فضلنا بعضهم على بعض منهم من كلم الله ورفع بعضهم درجات وآتينا عيسى ابن مريم البينات وأيدناه بروح القدس ولو شاء الله ما اقتتل الذين من بعدهم من بعد ما جاءتهم البينات ولكن اختلفوا فمنهم من آمن ومنهم من كفر ولو شاء الله ما اقتتلوا ولكن الله يفعل ما يريد
Those messengers We endowed with gifts, some above others: To one of them Allah spoke; others He raised to degrees (of honour); to Jesus the son of Mary We gave clear (Signs), and strengthened him with the holy spirit. If Allah had so willed, succeeding generations would not have fought among each other, after clear (Signs) had come to them, but they (chose) to wrangle, some believing and others rejecting. If Allah had so willed, they would not have fought each other; but Allah Fulfilleth His plan.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا أنفقوا مما رزقناكم من قبل أن يأتي يوم لا بيع فيه ولا خلة ولا شفاعة والكافرون هم الظالمون
O ye who believe! Spend out of (the bounties) We have provided for you, before the Day comes when no bargaining (Will avail), nor friendship nor intercession. Those who reject Faith they are the wrong-doers.

الله لا إله إلا هو الحي القيوم لا تأخذه سنة ولا نوم له ما في السماوات وما في الأرض من ذا الذي يشفع عنده إلا بإذنه يعلم ما بين أيديهم وما خلفهم ولا يحيطون بشيء من علمه إلا بما شاء وسع كرسيه السماوات والأرض ولا يئوده حفظهما وهو العلي العظيم
Allah! There is no god but He,-the Living, the Self-subsisting, Eternal. No slumber can seize Him nor sleep. His are all things in the heavens and on earth. Who is there can intercede in His presence except as He permitteth? He knoweth what (appeareth to His creatures as) before or after or behind them. Nor shall they compass aught of His knowledge except as He willeth. His Throne doth extend over the heavens and the earth, and He feeleth no fatigue in guarding and preserving them for He is the Most High, the Supreme (in glory).

لا إكراه في الدين قد تبين الرشد من الغي فمن يكفر بالطاغوت ويؤمن بالله فقد استمسك بالعروة الوثقى لا انفصام لها والله سميع عليم
Let there be no compulsion in religion: Truth stands out clear from Error: whoever rejects evil and believes in Allah hath grasped the most trustworthy hand-hold, that never breaks. And Allah heareth and knoweth all things.

الله ولي الذين آمنوا يخرجهم من الظلمات إلى النور والذين كفروا أولياؤهم الطاغوت يخرجونهم من النور إلى الظلمات أولئك أصحاب النار هم فيها خالدون
Allah is the Protector of those who have faith: from the depths of darkness He will lead them forth into light. Of those who reject faith the patrons are the evil ones: from light they will lead them forth into the depths of darkness. They will be companions of the fire, to dwell therein (For ever).

ألم تر إلى الذي حاج إبراهيم في ربه أن آتاه الله الملك إذ قال إبراهيم ربي الذي يحيي ويميت قال أنا أحيي وأميت قال إبراهيم فإن الله يأتي بالشمس من المشرق فأت بها من المغرب فبهت الذي كفر والله لا يهدي القوم الظالمين
Hast thou not Turned thy vision to one who disputed with Abraham About his Lord, because Allah had granted him power? Abraham said: "My Lord is He Who Giveth life and death." He said: "I give life and death". Said Abraham: "But it is Allah that causeth the sun to rise from the east: Do thou then cause him to rise from the West." Thus was he confounded who (in arrogance) rejected faith. Nor doth Allah Give guidance to a people unjust.

أو كالذي مر على قرية وهي خاوية على عروشها قال أنى يحيي هذه الله بعد موتها فأماته الله مائة عام ثم بعثه قال كم لبثت قال لبثت يوما أو بعض يوم قال بل لبثت مائة عام فانظر إلى طعامك وشرابك لم يتسنه وانظر إلى حمارك ولنجعلك آية للناس وانظر إلى العظام كيف ننشزها ثم نكسوها لحما فلما تبين له قال أعلم أن الله على كل شيء قدير
Or (take) the similitude of one who passed by a hamlet, all in ruins to its roofs. He said: "Oh! how shall Allah bring it (ever) to life, after (this) its death?" but Allah caused him to die for a hundred years, then raised him up (again). He said: "How long didst thou tarry (thus)?" He said: (Perhaps) a day or part of a day." He said: "Nay, thou hast tarried thus a hundred years; but look at thy food and thy drink; they show no signs of age; and look at thy donkey: And that We may make of thee a sign unto the people, Look further at the bones, how We bring them together and clothe them with flesh." When this was shown clearly to him, he said: "I know that Allah hath power over all things."

وإذ قال إبراهيم رب أرني كيف تحيي الموتى قال أولم تؤمن قال بلى ولكن ليطمئن قلبي قال فخذ أربعة من الطير فصرهن إليك ثم اجعل على كل جبل منهن جزءا ثم ادعهن يأتينك سعيا واعلم أن الله عزيز حكيم
When Abraham said: "Show me, Lord, how You will raise the dead, " He replied: "Have you no faith?" He said "Yes, but just to reassure my heart." Allah said, "Take four birds, draw them to you, and cut their bodies to pieces. Scatter them over the mountain-tops, then call them back. They will come swiftly to you. Know that Allah is Mighty, Wise."

مثل الذين ينفقون أموالهم في سبيل الله كمثل حبة أنبتت سبع سنابل في كل سنبلة مائة حبة والله يضاعف لمن يشاء والله واسع عليم
The parable of those who spend their substance in the way of Allah is that of a grain of corn: it groweth seven ears, and each ear Hath a hundred grains. Allah giveth manifold increase to whom He pleaseth: And Allah careth for all and He knoweth all things.

الذين ينفقون أموالهم في سبيل الله ثم لا يتبعون ما أنفقوا منا ولا أذى لهم أجرهم عند ربهم ولا خوف عليهم ولا هم يحزنون
Those who spend their substance in the cause of Allah, and follow not up their gifts with reminders of their generosity or with injury,-for them their reward is with their Lord: on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.

قول معروف ومغفرة خير من صدقة يتبعها أذى والله غني حليم
Kind words and the covering of faults are better than charity followed by injury. Allah is free of all wants, and He is Most-Forbearing.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تبطلوا صدقاتكم بالمن والأذى كالذي ينفق ماله رئاء الناس ولا يؤمن بالله واليوم الآخر فمثله كمثل صفوان عليه تراب فأصابه وابل فتركه صلدا لا يقدرون على شيء مما كسبوا والله لا يهدي القوم الكافرين
O ye who believe! cancel not your charity by reminders of your generosity or by injury,- like those who spend their substance to be seen of men, but believe neither in Allah nor in the Last Day. They are in parable like a hard, barren rock, on which is a little soil: on it falls heavy rain, which leaves it (Just) a bare stone. They will be able to do nothing with aught they have earned. And Allah guideth not those who reject faith.

ومثل الذين ينفقون أموالهم ابتغاء مرضات الله وتثبيتا من أنفسهم كمثل جنة بربوة أصابها وابل فآتت أكلها ضعفين فإن لم يصبها وابل فطل والله بما تعملون بصير
And the likeness of those who spend their substance, seeking to please Allah and to strengthen their souls, is as a garden, high and fertile: heavy rain falls on it but makes it yield a double increase of harvest, and if it receives not Heavy rain, light moisture sufficeth it. Allah seeth well whatever ye do.

أيود أحدكم أن تكون له جنة من نخيل وأعناب تجري من تحتها الأنهار له فيها من كل الثمرات وأصابه الكبر وله ذرية ضعفاء فأصابها إعصار فيه نار فاحترقت كذلك يبين الله لكم الآيات لعلكم تتفكرون
Does any of you wish that he should have a garden with date-palms and vines and streams flowing underneath, and all kinds of fruit, while he is stricken with old age, and his children are not strong (enough to look after themselves)- that it should be caught in a whirlwind, with fire therein, and be burnt up? Thus doth Allah make clear to you (His) Signs; that ye may consider.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا أنفقوا من طيبات ما كسبتم ومما أخرجنا لكم من الأرض ولا تيمموا الخبيث منه تنفقون ولستم بآخذيه إلا أن تغمضوا فيه واعلموا أن الله غني حميد
O ye who believe! Give of the good things which ye have (honourably) earned, and of the fruits of the earth which We have produced for you, and do not even aim at getting anything which is bad, in order that out of it ye may give away something, when ye yourselves would not receive it except with closed eyes. And know that Allah is Free of all wants, and worthy of all praise.

الشيطان يعدكم الفقر ويأمركم بالفحشاء والله يعدكم مغفرة منه وفضلا والله واسع عليم
The Evil one threatens you with poverty and bids you to conduct unseemly. Allah promiseth you His forgiveness and bounties. And Allah careth for all and He knoweth all things.

يؤتي الحكمة من يشاء ومن يؤت الحكمة فقد أوتي خيرا كثيرا وما يذكر إلا أولو الألباب
He granteth wisdom to whom He pleaseth; and he to whom wisdom is granted receiveth indeed a benefit overflowing; but none will grasp the Message but men of understanding.

وما أنفقتم من نفقة أو نذرتم من نذر فإن الله يعلمه وما للظالمين من أنصار
And whatever ye spend in charity or devotion, be sure Allah knows it all. But the wrong-doers have no helpers.

إن تبدوا الصدقات فنعما هي وإن تخفوها وتؤتوها الفقراء فهو خير لكم ويكفر عنكم من سيئاتكم والله بما تعملون خبير
If ye disclose (acts of) charity, even so it is well, but if ye conceal them, and make them reach those (really) in need, that is best for you: It will remove from you some of your (stains of) evil. And Allah is well acquainted with what ye do.

ليس عليك هداهم ولكن الله يهدي من يشاء وما تنفقوا من خير فلأنفسكم وما تنفقون إلا ابتغاء وجه الله وما تنفقوا من خير يوف إليكم وأنتم لا تظلمون
It is not required of thee (O Messenger), to set them on the right path, but Allah sets on the right path whom He pleaseth. Whatever of good ye give benefits your own souls, and ye shall only do so seeking the "Face" of Allah. Whatever good ye give, shall be rendered back to you, and ye shall not Be dealt with unjustly.

للفقراء الذين أحصروا في سبيل الله لا يستطيعون ضربا في الأرض يحسبهم الجاهل أغنياء من التعفف تعرفهم بسيماهم لا يسألون الناس إلحافا وما تنفقوا من خير فإن الله به عليم
(Charity is) for those in need, who, in Allah's cause are restricted (from travel), and cannot move about in the land, seeking (For trade or work): the ignorant man thinks, because of their modesty, that they are free from want. Thou shalt know them by their (Unfailing) mark: They beg not importunately from all the sundry. And whatever of good ye give, be assured Allah knoweth it well.

الذين ينفقون أموالهم بالليل والنهار سرا وعلانية فلهم أجرهم عند ربهم ولا خوف عليهم ولا هم يحزنون
Those who (in charity) spend of their goods by night and by day, in secret and in public, have their reward with their Lord: on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.

الذين يأكلون الربا لا يقومون إلا كما يقوم الذي يتخبطه الشيطان من المس ذلك بأنهم قالوا إنما البيع مثل الربا وأحل الله البيع وحرم الربا فمن جاءه موعظة من ربه فانتهى فله ما سلف وأمره إلى الله ومن عاد فأولئك أصحاب النار هم فيها خالدون
Those who devour usury will not stand except as stand one whom the Evil one by his touch Hath driven to madness. That is because they say: "Trade is like usury," but Allah hath permitted trade and forbidden usury. Those who after receiving direction from their Lord, desist, shall be pardoned for the past; their case is for Allah (to judge); but those who repeat (The offence) are companions of the Fire: They will abide therein (for ever).

يمحق الله الربا ويربي الصدقات والله لا يحب كل كفار أثيم
Allah will deprive usury of all blessing, but will give increase for deeds of charity: For He loveth not creatures ungrateful and wicked.

إن الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات وأقاموا الصلاة وآتوا الزكاة لهم أجرهم عند ربهم ولا خوف عليهم ولا هم يحزنون
Those who believe, and do deeds of righteousness, and establish regular prayers and regular charity, will have their reward with their Lord: on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا اتقوا الله وذروا ما بقي من الربا إن كنتم مؤمنين
O ye who believe! Fear Allah, and give up what remains of your demand for usury, if ye are indeed believers.

فإن لم تفعلوا فأذنوا بحرب من الله ورسوله وإن تبتم فلكم رءوس أموالكم لا تظلمون ولا تظلمون
If ye do it not, Take notice of war from Allah and His Messenger: But if ye turn back, ye shall have your capital sums: Deal not unjustly, and ye shall not be dealt with unjustly.

وإن كان ذو عسرة فنظرة إلى ميسرة وأن تصدقوا خير لكم إن كنتم تعلمون
If the debtor is in a difficulty, grant him time Till it is easy for him to repay. But if ye remit it by way of charity, that is best for you if ye only knew.

واتقوا يوما ترجعون فيه إلى الله ثم توفى كل نفس ما كسبت وهم لا يظلمون
And fear the Day when ye shall be brought back to Allah. Then shall every soul be paid what it earned, and none shall be dealt with unjustly.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إذا تداينتم بدين إلى أجل مسمى فاكتبوه وليكتب بينكم كاتب بالعدل ولا يأب كاتب أن يكتب كما علمه الله فليكتب وليملل الذي عليه الحق وليتق الله ربه ولا يبخس منه شيئا فإن كان الذي عليه الحق سفيها أو ضعيفا أو لا يستطيع أن يمل هو فليملل وليه بالعدل واستشهدوا شهيدين من رجالكم فإن لم يكونا رجلين فرجل وامرأتان ممن ترضون من الشهداء أن تضل إحداهما فتذكر إحداهما الأخرى ولا يأب الشهداء إذا ما دعوا ولا تسأموا أن تكتبوه صغيرا أو كبيرا إلى أجله ذلكم أقسط عند الله وأقوم للشهادة وأدنى ألا ترتابوا إلا أن تكون تجارة حاضرة تديرونها بينكم فليس عليكم جناح ألا تكتبوها وأشهدوا إذا تبايعتم ولا يضار كاتب ولا شهيد وإن تفعلوا فإنه فسوق بكم واتقوا الله ويعلمكم الله والله بكل شيء عليم
O ye who believe! When ye deal with each other, in transactions involving future obligations in a fixed period of time, reduce them to writing Let a scribe write down faithfully as between the parties: let not the scribe refuse to write: as Allah Has taught him, so let him write. Let him who incurs the liability dictate, but let him fear His Lord Allah, and not diminish aught of what he owes. If they party liable is mentally deficient, or weak, or unable Himself to dictate, Let his guardian dictate faithfully, and get two witnesses, out of your own men, and if there are not two men, then a man and two women, such as ye choose, for witnesses, so that if one of them errs, the other can remind her. The witnesses should not refuse when they are called on (For evidence). Disdain not to reduce to writing (your contract) for a future period, whether it be small or big: it is juster in the sight of Allah, More suitable as evidence, and more convenient to prevent doubts among yourselves but if it be a transaction which ye carry out on the spot among yourselves, there is no blame on you if ye reduce it not to writing. But take witness whenever ye make a commercial contract; and let neither scribe nor witness suffer harm. If ye do (such harm), it would be wickedness in you. So fear Allah; For it is Good that teaches you. And Allah is well acquainted with all things. If ye are on a journey, and cannot find a scribe, a pledge with possession (may serve the purpose). And if one of you deposits a thing on trust with another, let the trustee (faithfully) discharge his trust, and let him Fear his Lord conceal not evidence; for whoever conceals it, - his heart is tainted with sin. And Allah knoweth all that ye do.

وإن كنتم على سفر ولم تجدوا كاتبا فرهان مقبوضة فإن أمن بعضكم بعضا فليؤد الذي اؤتمن أمانته وليتق الله ربه ولا تكتموا الشهادة ومن يكتمها فإنه آثم قلبه والله بما تعملون عليم
If ye are on a journey, and cannot find a scribe, a pledge with possession (may serve the purpose). And if one of you deposits a thing on trust with another, Let the trustee (Faithfully) discharge His trust, and let him fear his Lord. Conceal not evidence; for whoever conceals it,- His heart is tainted with sin. And Allah Knoweth all that ye do.

لله ما في السماوات وما في الأرض وإن تبدوا ما في أنفسكم أو تخفوه يحاسبكم به الله فيغفر لمن يشاء ويعذب من يشاء والله على كل شيء قدير
To Allah belongeth all that is in the heavens and on earth. Whether ye show what is in your minds or conceal it, Allah Calleth you to account for it. He forgiveth whom He pleaseth, and punisheth whom He pleaseth, for Allah hath power over all things.

آمن الرسول بما أنزل إليه من ربه والمؤمنون كل آمن بالله وملائكته وكتبه ورسله لا نفرق بين أحد من رسله وقالوا سمعنا وأطعنا غفرانك ربنا وإليك المصير
The Messenger believeth in what hath been revealed to him from his Lord, as do the men of faith. Each one (of them) believeth in Allah, His angels, His books, and His messengers. "We make no distinction (they say) between one and another of His messengers." And they say: "We hear, and we obey: (We seek) Thy forgiveness, our Lord, and to Thee is the end of all journeys."

لا يكلف الله نفسا إلا وسعها لها ما كسبت وعليها ما اكتسبت ربنا لا تؤاخذنا إن نسينا أو أخطأنا ربنا ولا تحمل علينا إصرا كما حملته على الذين من قبلنا ربنا ولا تحملنا ما لا طاقة لنا به واعف عنا واغفر لنا وارحمنا أنت مولانا فانصرنا على القوم الكافرين
On no soul doth Allah Place a burden greater than it can bear. It gets every good that it earns, and it suffers every ill that it earns. (Pray:) "Our Lord! Condemn us not if we forget or fall into error; our Lord! Lay not on us a burden Like that which Thou didst lay on those before us; Our Lord! Lay not on us a burden greater than we have strength to bear. Blot out our sins, and grant us forgiveness. Have mercy on us. Thou art our Protector; Help us against those who stand against faith."

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الم
A. L. M.

الله لا إله إلا هو الحي القيوم
Allah! There is no god but He,-the Living, the Self-Subsisting, Eternal.

نزل عليك الكتاب بالحق مصدقا لما بين يديه وأنزل التوراة والإنجيل
It is He Who sent down to thee (step by step), in truth, the Book, confirming what went before it; and He sent down the Law (of Moses) and the Gospel (of Jesus) before this, as a guide to mankind, and He sent down the criterion (of judgment between right and wrong).

من قبل هدى للناس وأنزل الفرقان إن الذين كفروا بآيات الله لهم عذاب شديد والله عزيز ذو انتقام
Then those who reject Faith in the Signs of Allah will suffer the severest penalty, and Allah is Exalted in Might, Lord of Retribution.

إن الله لا يخفى عليه شيء في الأرض ولا في السماء
From Allah, verily nothing is hidden on earth or in the heavens.

هو الذي يصوركم في الأرحام كيف يشاء لا إله إلا هو العزيز الحكيم
He it is Who shapes you in the wombs as He pleases. There is no god but He, the Exalted in Might, the Wise.

هو الذي أنزل عليك الكتاب منه آيات محكمات هن أم الكتاب وأخر متشابهات فأما الذين في قلوبهم زيغ فيتبعون ما تشابه منه ابتغاء الفتنة وابتغاء تأويله وما يعلم تأويله إلا الله والراسخون في العلم يقولون آمنا به كل من عند ربنا وما يذكر إلا أولو الألباب
He it is Who has sent down to thee the Book: In it are verses basic or fundamental (of established meaning); they are the foundation of the Book: others are allegorical. But those in whose hearts is perversity follow the part thereof that is allegorical, seeking discord, and searching for its hidden meanings, but no one knows its hidden meanings except Allah. And those who are firmly grounded in knowledge say: "We believe in the Book; the whole of it is from our Lord:" and none will grasp the Message except men of understanding.

ربنا لا تزغ قلوبنا بعد إذ هديتنا وهب لنا من لدنك رحمة إنك أنت الوهاب
"Our Lord!" (they say), "Let not our hearts deviate now after Thou hast guided us, but grant us mercy from Thine own Presence; for Thou art the Grantor of bounties without measure.

ربنا إنك جامع الناس ليوم لا ريب فيه إن الله لا يخلف الميعاد
"Our Lord! Thou art He that will gather mankind Together against a day about which there is no doubt; for Allah never fails in His promise."

إن الذين كفروا لن تغني عنهم أموالهم ولا أولادهم من الله شيئا وأولئك هم وقود النار
Those who reject Faith,- neither their possessions nor their (numerous) progeny will avail them aught against Allah: They are themselves but fuel for the Fire.

كدأب آل فرعون والذين من قبلهم كذبوا بآياتنا فأخذهم الله بذنوبهم والله شديد العقاب
(Their plight will be) no better than that of the people of Pharaoh, and their predecessors: They denied our Signs, and Allah called them to account for their sins. For Allah is strict in punishment.

قل للذين كفروا ستغلبون وتحشرون إلى جهنم وبئس المهاد
Say to those who reject Faith: "Soon will ye be vanquished and gathered together to Hell,-an evil bed indeed (to lie on)!

قد كان لكم آية في فئتين التقتا فئة تقاتل في سبيل الله وأخرى كافرة يرونهم مثليهم رأي العين والله يؤيد بنصره من يشاء إن في ذلك لعبرة لأولي الأبصار
"There has already been for you a Sign in the two armies that met (in combat): One was fighting in the cause of Allah, the other resisting Allah; these saw with their own eyes Twice their number. But Allah doth support with His aid whom He pleaseth. In this is a warning for such as have eyes to see."

زين للناس حب الشهوات من النساء والبنين والقناطير المقنطرة من الذهب والفضة والخيل المسومة والأنعام والحرث ذلك متاع الحياة الدنيا والله عنده حسن المآب
Fair in the eyes of men is the love of things they covet: Women and sons; Heaped-up hoards of gold and silver; horses branded (for blood and excellence); and (wealth of) cattle and well-tilled land. Such are the possessions of this world's life; but in nearness to Allah is the best of the goals (To return to).

قل أؤنبئكم بخير من ذلكم للذين اتقوا عند ربهم جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها وأزواج مطهرة ورضوان من الله والله بصير بالعباد
Say: Shall I give you glad tidings of things Far better than those? For the righteous are Gardens in nearness to their Lord, with rivers flowing beneath; therein is their eternal home; with companions pure (and holy); and the good pleasure of Allah. For in Allah's sight are (all) His servants,-

الذين يقولون ربنا إننا آمنا فاغفر لنا ذنوبنا وقنا عذاب النار
(Namely), those who say: "Our Lord! we have indeed believed: forgive us, then, our sins, and save us from the agony of the Fire;"-

الصابرين والصادقين والقانتين والمنفقين والمستغفرين بالأسحار
Those who show patience, Firmness and self-control; who are true (in word and deed); who worship devoutly; who spend (in the way of Allah); and who pray for forgiveness in the early hours of the morning.

شهد الله أنه لا إله إلا هو والملائكة وأولو العلم قائما بالقسط لا إله إلا هو العزيز الحكيم
There is no god but He: That is the witness of Allah, His angels, and those endued with knowledge, standing firm on justice. There is no god but He, the Exalted in Power, the Wise.

إن الدين عند الله الإسلام وما اختلف الذين أوتوا الكتاب إلا من بعد ما جاءهم العلم بغيا بينهم ومن يكفر بآيات الله فإن الله سريع الحساب
The Religion before Allah is Islam (submission to His Will): Nor did the People of the Book dissent therefrom except through envy of each other, after knowledge had come to them. But if any deny the Signs of Allah, Allah is swift in calling to account.

فإن حاجوك فقل أسلمت وجهي لله ومن اتبعن وقل للذين أوتوا الكتاب والأميين أأسلمتم فإن أسلموا فقد اهتدوا وإن تولوا فإنما عليك البلاغ والله بصير بالعباد
So if they dispute with thee, say: "I have submitted My whole self to Allah and so have those who follow me." And say to the People of the Book and to those who are unlearned: "Do ye (also) submit yourselves?" If they do, they are in right guidance, but if they turn back, Thy duty is to convey the Message; and in Allah's sight are (all) His servants.

إن الذين يكفرون بآيات الله ويقتلون النبيين بغير حق ويقتلون الذين يأمرون بالقسط من الناس فبشرهم بعذاب أليم
As to those who deny the Signs of Allah and in defiance of right, slay the prophets, and slay those who teach just dealing with mankind, announce to them a grievous penalty.

أولئك الذين حبطت أعمالهم في الدنيا والآخرة وما لهم من ناصرين
They are those whose works will bear no fruit in this world and in the Hereafter nor will they have anyone to help.

ألم تر إلى الذين أوتوا نصيبا من الكتاب يدعون إلى كتاب الله ليحكم بينهم ثم يتولى فريق منهم وهم معرضون
Hast thou not turned Thy vision to those who have been given a portion of the Book? They are invited to the Book of Allah, to settle their dispute, but a party of them Turn back and decline (The arbitration).

ذلك بأنهم قالوا لن تمسنا النار إلا أياما معدودات وغرهم في دينهم ما كانوا يفترون
This because they say: "The Fire shall not touch us but for a few numbered days": For their forgeries deceive them as to their own religion.

فكيف إذا جمعناهم ليوم لا ريب فيه ووفيت كل نفس ما كسبت وهم لا يظلمون
But how (will they fare) when we gather them together against a day about which there is no doubt, and each soul will be paid out just what it has earned, without (favour or) injustice?

قل اللهم مالك الملك تؤتي الملك من تشاء وتنزع الملك ممن تشاء وتعز من تشاء وتذل من تشاء بيدك الخير إنك على كل شيء قدير
Say: "O Allah! Lord of Power (And Rule), Thou givest power to whom Thou pleasest, and Thou strippest off power from whom Thou pleasest: Thou enduest with honour whom Thou pleasest, and Thou bringest low whom Thou pleasest: In Thy hand is all good. Verily, over all things Thou hast power.

تولج الليل في النهار وتولج النهار في الليل وتخرج الحي من الميت وتخرج الميت من الحي وترزق من تشاء بغير حساب
"Thou causest the night to gain on the day, and thou causest the day to gain on the night; Thou bringest the Living out of the dead, and Thou bringest the dead out of the Living; and Thou givest sustenance to whom Thou pleasest, without measure."

لا يتخذ المؤمنون الكافرين أولياء من دون المؤمنين ومن يفعل ذلك فليس من الله في شيء إلا أن تتقوا منهم تقاة ويحذركم الله نفسه وإلى الله المصير
Let not the believers Take for friends or helpers Unbelievers rather than believers: if any do that, in nothing will there be help from Allah: except by way of precaution, that ye may Guard yourselves from them. But Allah cautions you (To remember) Himself; for the final goal is to Allah.

قل إن تخفوا ما في صدوركم أو تبدوه يعلمه الله ويعلم ما في السماوات وما في الأرض والله على كل شيء قدير
Say: "Whether ye hide what is in your hearts or reveal it, Allah knows it all: He knows what is in the heavens, and what is on earth. And Allah has power over all things.

يوم تجد كل نفس ما عملت من خير محضرا وما عملت من سوء تود لو أن بينها وبينه أمدا بعيدا ويحذركم الله نفسه والله رءوف بالعباد
"On the Day when every soul will be confronted with all the good it has done, and all the evil it has done, it will wish there were a great distance between it and its evil. But Allah cautions you (To remember) Himself. And Allah is full of kindness to those that serve Him."

قل إن كنتم تحبون الله فاتبعوني يحببكم الله ويغفر لكم ذنوبكم والله غفور رحيم
Say: "If ye do love Allah, Follow me: Allah will love you and forgive you your sins: For Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

قل أطيعوا الله والرسول فإن تولوا فإن الله لا يحب الكافرين
Say: "Obey Allah and His Messenger": But if they turn back, Allah loveth not those who reject Faith.

إن الله اصطفى آدم ونوحا وآل إبراهيم وآل عمران على العالمين
Allah did choose Adam and Noah, the family of Abraham, and the family of 'Imran above all people,-

ذرية بعضها من بعض والله سميع عليم
Offspring, one of the other: And Allah heareth and knoweth all things.

إذ قالت امرأت عمران رب إني نذرت لك ما في بطني محررا فتقبل مني إنك أنت السميع العليم
Behold! a woman of 'Imran said: "O my Lord! I do dedicate unto Thee what is in my womb for Thy special service: So accept this of me: For Thou hearest and knowest all things."

فلما وضعتها قالت رب إني وضعتها أنثى والله أعلم بما وضعت وليس الذكر كالأنثى وإني سميتها مريم وإني أعيذها بك وذريتها من الشيطان الرجيم
When she was delivered, she said: "O my Lord! Behold! I am delivered of a female child!"- and Allah knew best what she brought forth- "And no wise is the male Like the female. I have named her Mary, and I commend her and her offspring to Thy protection from the Evil One, the Rejected."

فتقبلها ربها بقبول حسن وأنبتها نباتا حسنا وكفلها زكريا كلما دخل عليها زكريا المحراب وجد عندها رزقا قال يا مريم أنى لك هذا قالت هو من عند الله إن الله يرزق من يشاء بغير حساب
Right graciously did her Lord accept her: He made her grow in purity and beauty: To the care of Zakariya was she assigned. Every time that he entered (Her) chamber to see her, He found her supplied with sustenance. He said: "O Mary! Whence (comes) this to you?" She said: "From Allah: for Allah Provides sustenance to whom He pleases without measure."

هنالك دعا زكريا ربه قال رب هب لي من لدنك ذرية طيبة إنك سميع الدعاء
There did Zakariya pray to his Lord, saying: "O my Lord! Grant unto me from Thee a progeny that is pure: for Thou art He that heareth prayer!

فنادته الملائكة وهو قائم يصلي في المحراب أن الله يبشرك بيحيى مصدقا بكلمة من الله وسيدا وحصورا ونبيا من الصالحين
While he was standing in prayer in the chamber, the angels called unto him: "Allah doth give thee glad tidings of Yahya, witnessing the truth of a Word from Allah, and (be besides) noble, chaste, and a prophet,- of the (goodly) company of the righteous."

قال رب أنى يكون لي غلام وقد بلغني الكبر وامرأتي عاقر قال كذلك الله يفعل ما يشاء
He said: "O my Lord! How shall I have son, seeing I am very old, and my wife is barren?" "Thus," was the answer, "Doth Allah accomplish what He willeth."

قال رب اجعل لي آية قال آيتك ألا تكلم الناس ثلاثة أيام إلا رمزا واذكر ربك كثيرا وسبح بالعشي والإبكار
He said: "O my Lord! Give me a Sign!" "Thy Sign," was the answer, "Shall be that thou shalt speak to no man for three days but with signals. Then celebrate the praises of thy Lord again and again, and glorify Him in the evening and in the morning."

وإذ قالت الملائكة يا مريم إن الله اصطفاك وطهرك واصطفاك على نساء العالمين
Behold! the angels said: "O Mary! Allah hath chosen thee and purified thee- chosen thee above the women of all nations.

يا مريم اقنتي لربك واسجدي واركعي مع الراكعين
"O Mary! worship Thy Lord devoutly: Prostrate thyself, and bow down (in prayer) with those who bow down."

ذلك من أنباء الغيب نوحيه إليك وما كنت لديهم إذ يلقون أقلامهم أيهم يكفل مريم وما كنت لديهم إذ يختصمون
This is part of the tidings of the things unseen, which We reveal unto thee (O Messenger!) by inspiration: Thou wast not with them when they cast lots with arrows, as to which of them should be charged with the care of Mary: Nor wast thou with them when they disputed (the point).

إذ قالت الملائكة يا مريم إن الله يبشرك بكلمة منه اسمه المسيح عيسى ابن مريم وجيها في الدنيا والآخرة ومن المقربين
Behold! the angels said: "O Mary! Allah giveth thee glad tidings of a Word from Him: his name will be Christ Jesus, the son of Mary, held in honour in this world and the Hereafter and of (the company of) those nearest to Allah;

ويكلم الناس في المهد وكهلا ومن الصالحين
"He shall speak to the people in childhood and in maturity. And he shall be (of the company) of the righteous."

قالت رب أنى يكون لي ولد ولم يمسسني بشر قال كذلك الله يخلق ما يشاء إذا قضى أمرا فإنما يقول له كن فيكون
She said: "O my Lord! How shall I have a son when no man hath touched me?" He said: "Even so: Allah createth what He willeth: When He hath decreed a plan, He but saith to it, 'Be,' and it is!

ويعلمه الكتاب والحكمة والتوراة والإنجيل
"And Allah will teach him the Book and Wisdom, the Law and the Gospel,

ورسولا إلى بني إسرائيل أني قد جئتكم بآية من ربكم أني أخلق لكم من الطين كهيئة الطير فأنفخ فيه فيكون طيرا بإذن الله وأبرئ الأكمه والأبرص وأحيي الموتى بإذن الله وأنبئكم بما تأكلون وما تدخرون في بيوتكم إن في ذلك لآية لكم إن كنتم مؤمنين
"And (appoint him) a messenger to the Children of Israel, (with this message): "'I have come to you, with a Sign from your Lord, in that I make for you out of clay, as it were, the figure of a bird, and breathe into it, and it becomes a bird by Allah's leave: And I heal those born blind, and the lepers, and I quicken the dead, by Allah's leave; and I declare to you what ye eat, and what ye store in your houses. Surely therein is a Sign for you if ye did believe;

ومصدقا لما بين يدي من التوراة ولأحل لكم بعض الذي حرم عليكم وجئتكم بآية من ربكم فاتقوا الله وأطيعون
"'(I have come to you), to attest the Law which was before me. And to make lawful to you part of what was (Before) forbidden to you; I have come to you with a Sign from your Lord. So fear Allah, and obey me.

إن الله ربي وربكم فاعبدوه هذا صراط مستقيم
"'It is Allah Who is my Lord and your Lord; then worship Him. This is a Way that is straight.'"

فلما أحس عيسى منهم الكفر قال من أنصاري إلى الله قال الحواريون نحن أنصار الله آمنا بالله واشهد بأنا مسلمون
When Jesus found Unbelief on their part He said: "Who will be My helpers to (the work of) Allah?" Said the disciples: "We are Allah's helpers: We believe in Allah, and do thou bear witness that we are Muslims.

ربنا آمنا بما أنزلت واتبعنا الرسول فاكتبنا مع الشاهدين
"Our Lord! we believe in what Thou hast revealed, and we follow the Messenger; then write us down among those who bear witness."

ومكروا ومكر الله والله خير الماكرين
And (the unbelievers) plotted and planned, and Allah too planned, and the best of planners is Allah.

إذ قال الله يا عيسى إني متوفيك ورافعك إلي ومطهرك من الذين كفروا وجاعل الذين اتبعوك فوق الذين كفروا إلى يوم القيامة ثم إلي مرجعكم فأحكم بينكم فيما كنتم فيه تختلفون
Behold! Allah said: "O Jesus! I will take thee and raise thee to Myself and clear thee (of the falsehoods) of those who blaspheme; I will make those who follow thee superior to those who reject faith, to the Day of Resurrection: Then shall ye all return unto me, and I will judge between you of the matters wherein ye dispute.

فأما الذين كفروا فأعذبهم عذابا شديدا في الدنيا والآخرة وما لهم من ناصرين
"As to those who reject faith, I will punish them with terrible agony in this world and in the Hereafter, nor will they have anyone to help."

وأما الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات فيوفيهم أجورهم والله لا يحب الظالمين
"As to those who believe and work righteousness, Allah will pay them (in full) their reward; but Allah loveth not those who do wrong."

ذلك نتلوه عليك من الآيات والذكر الحكيم
"This is what we rehearse unto thee of the Signs and the Message of Wisdom."

إن مثل عيسى عند الله كمثل آدم خلقه من تراب ثم قال له كن فيكون
The similitude of Jesus before Allah is as that of Adam; He created him from dust, then said to him: "Be". And he was.

الحق من ربك فلا تكن من الممترين
The Truth (comes) from Allah alone; so be not of those who doubt.

فمن حاجك فيه من بعد ما جاءك من العلم فقل تعالوا ندع أبناءنا وأبناءكم ونساءنا ونساءكم وأنفسنا وأنفسكم ثم نبتهل فنجعل لعنت الله على الكاذبين
If any one disputes in this matter with thee, now after (full) knowledge Hath come to thee, say: "Come! let us gather together,- our sons and your sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves: Then let us earnestly pray, and invoke the curse of Allah on those who lie!"

إن هذا لهو القصص الحق وما من إله إلا الله وإن الله لهو العزيز الحكيم
This is the true account: There is no god except Allah; and Allah-He is indeed the Exalted in Power, the Wise.

فإن تولوا فإن الله عليم بالمفسدين
But if they turn back, Allah hath full knowledge of those who do mischief.

قل يا أهل الكتاب تعالوا إلى كلمة سواء بيننا وبينكم ألا نعبد إلا الله ولا نشرك به شيئا ولا يتخذ بعضنا بعضا أربابا من دون الله فإن تولوا فقولوا اشهدوا بأنا مسلمون
Say: "O People of the Book! come to common terms as between us and you: That we worship none but Allah; that we associate no partners with him; that we erect not, from among ourselves, Lords and patrons other than Allah." If then they turn back, say ye: "Bear witness that we (at least) are Muslims (bowing to Allah's Will).

يا أهل الكتاب لم تحاجون في إبراهيم وما أنزلت التوراة والإنجيل إلا من بعده أفلا تعقلون
Ye People of the Book! Why dispute ye about Abraham, when the Law and the Gospel Were not revealed Till after him? Have ye no understanding?

ها أنتم هؤلاء حاججتم فيما لكم به علم فلم تحاجون فيما ليس لكم به علم والله يعلم وأنتم لا تعلمون
Ah! Ye are those who fell to disputing (Even) in matters of which ye had some knowledge! but why dispute ye in matters of which ye have no knowledge? It is Allah Who knows, and ye who know not!

ما كان إبراهيم يهوديا ولا نصرانيا ولكن كان حنيفا مسلما وما كان من المشركين
Abraham was not a Jew nor yet a Christian; but he was true in Faith, and bowed his will to Allah's (Which is Islam), and he joined not gods with Allah.

إن أولى الناس بإبراهيم للذين اتبعوه وهذا النبي والذين آمنوا والله ولي المؤمنين
Without doubt, among men, the nearest of kin to Abraham, are those who follow him, as are also this Prophet and those who believe: And Allah is the Protector of those who have faith.

ودت طائفة من أهل الكتاب لو يضلونكم وما يضلون إلا أنفسهم وما يشعرون
It is the wish of a section of the People of the Book to lead you astray. But they shall lead astray (Not you), but themselves, and they do not perceive!

يا أهل الكتاب لم تكفرون بآيات الله وأنتم تشهدون
Ye People of the Book! Why reject ye the Signs of Allah, of which ye are (Yourselves) witnesses?

يا أهل الكتاب لم تلبسون الحق بالباطل وتكتمون الحق وأنتم تعلمون
Ye People of the Book! Why do ye clothe Truth with falsehood, and conceal the Truth, while ye have knowledge?

وقالت طائفة من أهل الكتاب آمنوا بالذي أنزل على الذين آمنوا وجه النهار واكفروا آخره لعلهم يرجعون
A section of the People of the Book say: "Believe in the morning what is revealed to the believers, but reject it at the end of the day; perchance they may (themselves) Turn back;

ولا تؤمنوا إلا لمن تبع دينكم قل إن الهدى هدى الله أن يؤتى أحد مثل ما أوتيتم أو يحاجوكم عند ربكم قل إن الفضل بيد الله يؤتيه من يشاء والله واسع عليم
"And believe no one unless he follows your religion." Say: "True guidance is the Guidance of Allah: (Fear ye) Lest a revelation be sent to someone (else) Like unto that which was sent unto you? or that those (Receiving such revelation) should engage you in argument before your Lord?" Say: "All bounties are in the hand of Allah: He granteth them to whom He pleaseth: And Allah careth for all, and He knoweth all things."

يختص برحمته من يشاء والله ذو الفضل العظيم
For His Mercy He specially chooseth whom He pleaseth; for Allah is the Lord of bounties unbounded.

ومن أهل الكتاب من إن تأمنه بقنطار يؤده إليك ومنهم من إن تأمنه بدينار لا يؤده إليك إلا ما دمت عليه قائما ذلك بأنهم قالوا ليس علينا في الأميين سبيل ويقولون على الله الكذب وهم يعلمون
Among the People of the Book are some who, if entrusted with a hoard of gold, will (readily) pay it back; others, who, if entrusted with a single silver coin, will not repay it unless thou constantly stoodest demanding, because, they say, "there is no call on us (to keep faith) with these ignorant (Pagans)." but they tell a lie against Allah, and (well) they know it.

بلى من أوفى بعهده واتقى فإن الله يحب المتقين
Nay.- Those that keep their plighted faith and act aright,-verily Allah loves those who act aright.

إن الذين يشترون بعهد الله وأيمانهم ثمنا قليلا أولئك لا خلاق لهم في الآخرة ولا يكلمهم الله ولا ينظر إليهم يوم القيامة ولا يزكيهم ولهم عذاب أليم
As for those who sell the faith they owe to Allah and their own plighted word for a small price, they shall have no portion in the Hereafter: Nor will Allah (Deign to) speak to them or look at them on the Day of Judgment, nor will He cleans them (of sin): They shall have a grievous penalty.

وإن منهم لفريقا يلوون ألسنتهم بالكتاب لتحسبوه من الكتاب وما هو من الكتاب ويقولون هو من عند الله وما هو من عند الله ويقولون على الله الكذب وهم يعلمون
There is among them a section who distort the Book with their tongues: (As they read) you would think it is a part of the Book, but it is no part of the Book; and they say, "That is from Allah," but it is not from Allah: It is they who tell a lie against Allah, and (well) they know it!

ما كان لبشر أن يؤتيه الله الكتاب والحكم والنبوة ثم يقول للناس كونوا عبادا لي من دون الله ولكن كونوا ربانيين بما كنتم تعلمون الكتاب وبما كنتم تدرسون
It is not (possible) that a man, to whom is given the Book, and Wisdom, and the prophetic office, should say to people: "Be ye my worshippers rather than Allah's": on the contrary (He would say) "Be ye worshippers of Him Who is truly the Cherisher of all: For ye have taught the Book and ye have studied it earnestly."

ولا يأمركم أن تتخذوا الملائكة والنبيين أربابا أيأمركم بالكفر بعد إذ أنتم مسلمون
Nor would he instruct you to take angels and prophets for Lords and patrons. What! would he bid you to unbelief after ye have bowed your will (To Allah in Islam)?

وإذ أخذ الله ميثاق النبيين لما آتيتكم من كتاب وحكمة ثم جاءكم رسول مصدق لما معكم لتؤمنن به ولتنصرنه قال أأقررتم وأخذتم على ذلكم إصري قالوا أقررنا قال فاشهدوا وأنا معكم من الشاهدين
Behold! Allah took the covenant of the prophets, saying: "I give you a Book and Wisdom; then comes to you a messenger, confirming what is with you; do ye believe in him and render him help." Allah said: "Do ye agree, and take this my Covenant as binding on you?" They said: "We agree." He said: "Then bear witness, and I am with you among the witnesses."

فمن تولى بعد ذلك فأولئك هم الفاسقون
If any turn back after this, they are perverted transgressors.

أفغير دين الله يبغون وله أسلم من في السماوات والأرض طوعا وكرها وإليه يرجعون
Do they seek for other than the Religion of Allah?-while all creatures in the heavens and on earth have, willing or unwilling, bowed to His Will (Accepted Islam), and to Him shall they all be brought back.

قل آمنا بالله وما أنزل علينا وما أنزل على إبراهيم وإسماعيل وإسحاق ويعقوب والأسباط وما أوتي موسى وعيسى والنبيون من ربهم لا نفرق بين أحد منهم ونحن له مسلمون
Say: "We believe in Allah, and in what has been revealed to us and what was revealed to Abraham, Isma'il, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, and in (the Books) given to Moses, Jesus, and the prophets, from their Lord: We make no distinction between one and another among them, and to Allah do we bow our will (in Islam)."

ومن يبتغ غير الإسلام دينا فلن يقبل منه وهو في الآخرة من الخاسرين
If anyone desires a religion other than Islam (submission to Allah), never will it be accepted of him; and in the Hereafter He will be in the ranks of those who have lost (All spiritual good).

كيف يهدي الله قوما كفروا بعد إيمانهم وشهدوا أن الرسول حق وجاءهم البينات والله لا يهدي القوم الظالمين
How shall Allah Guide those who reject Faith after they accepted it and bore witness that the Messenger was true and that Clear Signs had come unto them? but Allah guides not a people unjust.

أولئك جزاؤهم أن عليهم لعنة الله والملائكة والناس أجمعين
Of such the reward is that on them (rests) the curse of Allah, of His angels, and of all mankind;-

خالدين فيها لا يخفف عنهم العذاب ولا هم ينظرون
In that will they dwell; nor will their penalty be lightened, nor respite be (their lot);-

إلا الذين تابوا من بعد ذلك وأصلحوا فإن الله غفور رحيم
Except for those that repent (Even) after that, and make amends; for verily Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

إن الذين كفروا بعد إيمانهم ثم ازدادوا كفرا لن تقبل توبتهم وأولئك هم الضالون
But those who reject Faith after they accepted it, and then go on adding to their defiance of Faith,- never will their repentance be accepted; for they are those who have (of set purpose) gone astray.

إن الذين كفروا وماتوا وهم كفار فلن يقبل من أحدهم ملء الأرض ذهبا ولو افتدى به أولئك لهم عذاب أليم وما لهم من ناصرين
As to those who reject Faith, and die rejecting,- never would be accepted from any such as much gold as the earth contains, though they should offer it for ransom. For such is (in store) a penalty grievous, and they will find no helpers.

لن تنالوا البر حتى تنفقوا مما تحبون وما تنفقوا من شيء فإن الله به عليم
By no means shall ye attain righteousness unless ye give (freely) of that which ye love; and whatever ye give, of a truth Allah knoweth it well.

كل الطعام كان حلا لبني إسرائيل إلا ما حرم إسرائيل على نفسه من قبل أن تنزل التوراة قل فأتوا بالتوراة فاتلوها إن كنتم صادقين
All food was lawful to the Children of Israel, except what Israel Made unlawful for itself, before the Law (of Moses) was revealed. Say: "Bring ye the Law and study it, if ye be men of truth."

فمن افترى على الله الكذب من بعد ذلك فأولئك هم الظالمون
If any, after this, invent a lie and attribute it to Allah, they are indeed unjust wrong-doers.

قل صدق الله فاتبعوا ملة إبراهيم حنيفا وما كان من المشركين
Say: "Allah speaketh the Truth: follow the religion of Abraham, the sane in faith; he was not of the Pagans."

إن أول بيت وضع للناس للذي ببكة مباركا وهدى للعالمين
The first House (of worship) appointed for men was that at Bakka: Full of blessing and of guidance for all kinds of beings:

فيه آيات بينات مقام إبراهيم ومن دخله كان آمنا ولله على الناس حج البيت من استطاع إليه سبيلا ومن كفر فإن الله غني عن العالمين
In it are Signs Manifest; (for example), the Station of Abraham; whoever enters it attains security; Pilgrimage thereto is a duty men owe to Allah,- those who can afford the journey; but if any deny faith, Allah stands not in need of any of His creatures.

قل يا أهل الكتاب لم تكفرون بآيات الله والله شهيد على ما تعملون
Say: "O People of the Book! Why reject ye the Signs of Allah, when Allah is Himself witness to all ye do?"

قل يا أهل الكتاب لم تصدون عن سبيل الله من آمن تبغونها عوجا وأنتم شهداء وما الله بغافل عما تعملون
Say: "O ye People of the Book! Why obstruct ye those who believe, from the path of Allah, Seeking to make it crooked, while ye were yourselves witnesses (to Allah's Covenant)? but Allah is not unmindful of all that ye do."

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إن تطيعوا فريقا من الذين أوتوا الكتاب يردوكم بعد إيمانكم كافرين
O ye who believe! If ye listen to a faction among the People of the Book, they would (indeed) render you apostates after ye have believed!

وكيف تكفرون وأنتم تتلى عليكم آيات الله وفيكم رسوله ومن يعتصم بالله فقد هدي إلى صراط مستقيم
And how would ye deny Faith while unto you are rehearsed the Signs of Allah, and among you Lives the Messenger? Whoever holds firmly to Allah will be shown a way that is straight.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا اتقوا الله حق تقاته ولا تموتن إلا وأنتم مسلمون
O ye who believe! Fear Allah as He should be feared, and die not except in a state of Islam.

واعتصموا بحبل الله جميعا ولا تفرقوا واذكروا نعمت الله عليكم إذ كنتم أعداء فألف بين قلوبكم فأصبحتم بنعمته إخوانا وكنتم على شفا حفرة من النار فأنقذكم منها كذلك يبين الله لكم آياته لعلكم تهتدون
And hold fast, all together, by the rope which Allah (stretches out for you), and be not divided among yourselves; and remember with gratitude Allah's favour on you; for ye were enemies and He joined your hearts in love, so that by His Grace, ye became brethren; and ye were on the brink of the pit of Fire, and He saved you from it. Thus doth Allah make His Signs clear to you: That ye may be guided.

ولتكن منكم أمة يدعون إلى الخير ويأمرون بالمعروف وينهون عن المنكر وأولئك هم المفلحون
Let there arise out of you a band of people inviting to all that is good, enjoining what is right, and forbidding what is wrong: They are the ones to attain felicity.

ولا تكونوا كالذين تفرقوا واختلفوا من بعد ما جاءهم البينات وأولئك لهم عذاب عظيم
Be not like those who are divided amongst themselves and fall into disputations after receiving Clear Signs: For them is a dreadful penalty,-

يوم تبيض وجوه وتسود وجوه فأما الذين اسودت وجوههم أكفرتم بعد إيمانكم فذوقوا العذاب بما كنتم تكفرون
On the Day when some faces will be (lit up with) white, and some faces will be (in the gloom of) black: To those whose faces will be black, (will be said): "Did ye reject Faith after accepting it? Taste then the penalty for rejecting Faith."

وأما الذين ابيضت وجوههم ففي رحمة الله هم فيها خالدون
But those whose faces will be (lit with) white,- they will be in (the light of) Allah's mercy: therein to dwell (for ever).

تلك آيات الله نتلوها عليك بالحق وما الله يريد ظلما للعالمين
These are the Signs of Allah: We rehearse them to thee in Truth: And Allah means no injustice to any of His creatures.

ولله ما في السماوات وما في الأرض وإلى الله ترجع الأمور
To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth: To Him do all questions go back (for decision).

كنتم خير أمة أخرجت للناس تأمرون بالمعروف وتنهون عن المنكر وتؤمنون بالله ولو آمن أهل الكتاب لكان خيرا لهم منهم المؤمنون وأكثرهم الفاسقون
Ye are the best of peoples, evolved for mankind, enjoining what is right, forbidding what is wrong, and believing in Allah. If only the People of the Book had faith, it were best for them: among them are some who have faith, but most of them are perverted transgressors.

لن يضروكم إلا أذى وإن يقاتلوكم يولوكم الأدبار ثم لا ينصرون
They will do you no harm, barring a trifling annoyance; if they come out to fight you, they will show you their backs, and no help shall they get.

ضربت عليهم الذلة أين ما ثقفوا إلا بحبل من الله وحبل من الناس وباءوا بغضب من الله وضربت عليهم المسكنة ذلك بأنهم كانوا يكفرون بآيات الله ويقتلون الأنبياء بغير حق ذلك بما عصوا وكانوا يعتدون
Shame is pitched over them (Like a tent) wherever they are found, except when under a covenant (of protection) from Allah and from men; they draw on themselves wrath from Allah, and pitched over them is (the tent of) destitution. This because they rejected the Signs of Allah, and slew the prophets in defiance of right; this because they rebelled and transgressed beyond bounds.

ليسوا سواء من أهل الكتاب أمة قائمة يتلون آيات الله آناء الليل وهم يسجدون
Not all of them are alike: Of the People of the Book are a portion that stand (For the right): They rehearse the Signs of Allah all night long, and they prostrate themselves in adoration.

يؤمنون بالله واليوم الآخر ويأمرون بالمعروف وينهون عن المنكر ويسارعون في الخيرات وأولئك من الصالحين
They believe in Allah and the Last Day; they enjoin what is right, and forbid what is wrong; and they hasten (in emulation) in (all) good works: They are in the ranks of the righteous.

وما يفعلوا من خير فلن يكفروه والله عليم بالمتقين
Of the good that they do, nothing will be rejected of them; for Allah knoweth well those that do right.

إن الذين كفروا لن تغني عنهم أموالهم ولا أولادهم من الله شيئا وأولئك أصحاب النار هم فيها خالدون
Those who reject Faith,- neither their possessions nor their (numerous) progeny will avail them aught against Allah: They will be companions of the Fire,-dwelling therein (for ever).

مثل ما ينفقون في هذه الحياة الدنيا كمثل ريح فيها صر أصابت حرث قوم ظلموا أنفسهم فأهلكته وما ظلمهم الله ولكن أنفسهم يظلمون
What they spend in the life of this (material) world May be likened to a wind which brings a nipping frost: It strikes and destroys the harvest of men who have wronged their own souls: it is not Allah that hath wronged them, but they wrong themselves.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تتخذوا بطانة من دونكم لا يألونكم خبالا ودوا ما عنتم قد بدت البغضاء من أفواههم وما تخفي صدورهم أكبر قد بينا لكم الآيات إن كنتم تعقلون
O ye who believe! Take not into your intimacy those outside your ranks: They will not fail to corrupt you. They only desire your ruin: Rank hatred has already appeared from their mouths: What their hearts conceal is far worse. We have made plain to you the Signs, if ye have wisdom.

ها أنتم أولاء تحبونهم ولا يحبونكم وتؤمنون بالكتاب كله وإذا لقوكم قالوا آمنا وإذا خلوا عضوا عليكم الأنامل من الغيظ قل موتوا بغيظكم إن الله عليم بذات الصدور
Ah! ye are those who love them, but they love you not,- though ye believe in the whole of the Book. When they meet you, they say, "We believe": But when they are alone, they bite off the very tips of their fingers at you in their rage. Say: "Perish in your rage; Allah knoweth well all the secrets of the heart."

إن تمسسكم حسنة تسؤهم وإن تصبكم سيئة يفرحوا بها وإن تصبروا وتتقوا لا يضركم كيدهم شيئا إن الله بما يعملون محيط
If aught that is good befalls you, it grieves them; but if some misfortune overtakes you, they rejoice at it. But if ye are constant and do right, not the least harm will their cunning do to you; for Allah Compasseth round about all that they do.

وإذ غدوت من أهلك تبوئ المؤمنين مقاعد للقتال والله سميع عليم
Remember that morning Thou didst leave Thy household (early) to post the faithful at their stations for battle: And Allah heareth and knoweth all things:

إذ همت طائفتان منكم أن تفشلا والله وليهما وعلى الله فليتوكل المؤمنون
Remember two of your parties Meditated cowardice; but Allah was their protector, and in Allah should the faithful (Ever) put their trust.

ولقد نصركم الله ببدر وأنتم أذلة فاتقوا الله لعلكم تشكرون
Allah had helped you at Badr, when ye were a contemptible little force; then fear Allah; thus May ye show your gratitude.

إذ تقول للمؤمنين ألن يكفيكم أن يمدكم ربكم بثلاثة آلاف من الملائكة منزلين
Remember thou saidst to the Faithful: "Is it not enough for you that Allah should help you with three thousand angels (Specially) sent down?

بلى إن تصبروا وتتقوا ويأتوكم من فورهم هذا يمددكم ربكم بخمسة آلاف من الملائكة مسومين
"Yea, - if ye remain firm, and act aright, even if the enemy should rush here on you in hot haste, your Lord would help you with five thousand angels Making a terrific onslaught.

وما جعله الله إلا بشرى لكم ولتطمئن قلوبكم به وما النصر إلا من عند الله العزيز الحكيم
Allah made it but a message of hope for you, and an assurance to your hearts: (in any case) there is no help except from Allah. The Exalted, the Wise:

ليقطع طرفا من الذين كفروا أو يكبتهم فينقلبوا خائبين
That He might cut off a fringe of the Unbelievers or expose them to infamy, and they should then be turned back, frustrated of their purpose.

ليس لك من الأمر شيء أو يتوب عليهم أو يعذبهم فإنهم ظالمون
Not for thee, (but for Allah), is the decision: Whether He turn in mercy to them, or punish them; for they are indeed wrong-doers.

ولله ما في السماوات وما في الأرض يغفر لمن يشاء ويعذب من يشاء والله غفور رحيم
To Allah belongeth all that is in the heavens and on earth. He forgiveth whom He pleaseth and punisheth whom He pleaseth; but Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تأكلوا الربا أضعافا مضاعفة واتقوا الله لعلكم تفلحون
O ye who believe! Devour not usury, doubled and multiplied; but fear Allah; that ye may (really) prosper.

واتقوا النار التي أعدت للكافرين
Fear the Fire, which is repaired for those who reject Faith:

وأطيعوا الله والرسول لعلكم ترحمون
And obey Allah and the Messenger; that ye may obtain mercy.

وسارعوا إلى مغفرة من ربكم وجنة عرضها السماوات والأرض أعدت للمتقين
Be quick in the race for forgiveness from your Lord, and for a Garden whose width is that (of the whole) of the heavens and of the earth, prepared for the righteous,-

الذين ينفقون في السراء والضراء والكاظمين الغيظ والعافين عن الناس والله يحب المحسنين
Those who spend (freely), whether in prosperity, or in adversity; who restrain anger, and pardon (all) men;- for Allah loves those who do good;-

والذين إذا فعلوا فاحشة أو ظلموا أنفسهم ذكروا الله فاستغفروا لذنوبهم ومن يغفر الذنوب إلا الله ولم يصروا على ما فعلوا وهم يعلمون
And those who, having done something to be ashamed of, or wronged their own souls, earnestly bring Allah to mind, and ask for forgiveness for their sins,- and who can forgive sins except Allah?- and are never obstinate in persisting knowingly in (the wrong) they have done.

أولئك جزاؤهم مغفرة من ربهم وجنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها ونعم أجر العاملين
For such the reward is forgiveness from their Lord, and Gardens with rivers flowing underneath,- an eternal dwelling: How excellent a recompense for those who work (and strive)!

قد خلت من قبلكم سنن فسيروا في الأرض فانظروا كيف كان عاقبة المكذبين
Many were the Ways of Life that have passed away before you: travel through the earth, and see what was the end of those who rejected Truth.

هذا بيان للناس وهدى وموعظة للمتقين
Here is a plain statement to men, a guidance and instruction to those who fear Allah!

ولا تهنوا ولا تحزنوا وأنتم الأعلون إن كنتم مؤمنين
So lose not heart, nor fall into despair: For ye must gain mastery if ye are true in Faith.

إن يمسسكم قرح فقد مس القوم قرح مثله وتلك الأيام نداولها بين الناس وليعلم الله الذين آمنوا ويتخذ منكم شهداء والله لا يحب الظالمين
If a wound hath touched you, be sure a similar wound hath touched the others. Such days (of varying fortunes) We give to men and men by turns: that Allah may know those that believe, and that He may take to Himself from your ranks Martyr-witnesses (to Truth). And Allah loveth not those that do wrong.

وليمحص الله الذين آمنوا ويمحق الكافرين
Allah's object also is to purge those that are true in Faith and to deprive of blessing Those that resist Faith.

أم حسبتم أن تدخلوا الجنة ولما يعلم الله الذين جاهدوا منكم ويعلم الصابرين
Did ye think that ye would enter Heaven without Allah testing those of you who fought hard (In His Cause) and remained steadfast?

ولقد كنتم تمنون الموت من قبل أن تلقوه فقد رأيتموه وأنتم تنظرون
Ye did indeed wish for death before ye met him: Now ye have seen him with your own eyes, (And ye flinch!)

وما محمد إلا رسول قد خلت من قبله الرسل أفإن مات أو قتل انقلبتم على أعقابكم ومن ينقلب على عقبيه فلن يضر الله شيئا وسيجزي الله الشاكرين
Muhammad is no more than a messenger: many Were the messenger that passed away before him. If he died or were slain, will ye then Turn back on your heels? If any did turn back on his heels, not the least harm will he do to Allah; but Allah (on the other hand) will swiftly reward those who (serve Him) with gratitude.

وما كان لنفس أن تموت إلا بإذن الله كتابا مؤجلا ومن يرد ثواب الدنيا نؤته منها ومن يرد ثواب الآخرة نؤته منها وسنجزي الشاكرين
Nor can a soul die except by Allah's leave, the term being fixed as by writing. If any do desire a reward in this life, We shall give it to him; and if any do desire a reward in the Hereafter, We shall give it to him. And swiftly shall We reward those that (serve us with) gratitude.

وكأين من نبي قاتل معه ربيون كثير فما وهنوا لما أصابهم في سبيل الله وما ضعفوا وما استكانوا والله يحب الصابرين
How many of the prophets fought (in Allah's way), and with them (fought) Large bands of godly men? but they never lost heart if they met with disaster in Allah's way, nor did they weaken (in will) nor give in. And Allah Loves those who are firm and steadfast.

وما كان قولهم إلا أن قالوا ربنا اغفر لنا ذنوبنا وإسرافنا في أمرنا وثبت أقدامنا وانصرنا على القوم الكافرين
All that they said was: "Our Lord! Forgive us our sins and anything We may have done that transgressed our duty: Establish our feet firmly, and help us against those that resist Faith."

فآتاهم الله ثواب الدنيا وحسن ثواب الآخرة والله يحب المحسنين
And Allah gave them a reward in this world, and the excellent reward of the Hereafter. For Allah Loveth those who do good.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إن تطيعوا الذين كفروا يردوكم على أعقابكم فتنقلبوا خاسرين
O ye who believe! If ye obey the Unbelievers, they will drive you back on your heels, and ye will turn back (from Faith) to your own loss.

بل الله مولاكم وهو خير الناصرين
Nay, Allah is your protector, and He is the best of helpers.

سنلقي في قلوب الذين كفروا الرعب بما أشركوا بالله ما لم ينزل به سلطانا ومأواهم النار وبئس مثوى الظالمين
Soon shall We cast terror into the hearts of the Unbelievers, for that they joined companions with Allah, for which He had sent no authority: their abode will be the Fire: And evil is the home of the wrong-doers!

ولقد صدقكم الله وعده إذ تحسونهم بإذنه حتى إذا فشلتم وتنازعتم في الأمر وعصيتم من بعد ما أراكم ما تحبون منكم من يريد الدنيا ومنكم من يريد الآخرة ثم صرفكم عنهم ليبتليكم ولقد عفا عنكم والله ذو فضل على المؤمنين
Allah did indeed fulfil His promise to you when ye with His permission Were about to annihilate your enemy,-until ye flinched and fell to disputing about the order, and disobeyed it after He brought you in sight (of the booty) which ye covet. Among you are some that hanker after this world and some that desire the Hereafter. Then did He divert you from your foes in order to test you but He forgave you: For Allah is full of grace to those who believe.

إذ تصعدون ولا تلوون على أحد والرسول يدعوكم في أخراكم فأثابكم غما بغم لكيلا تحزنوا على ما فاتكم ولا ما أصابكم والله خبير بما تعملون
Behold! ye were climbing up the high ground, without even casting a side glance at any one, and the Messenger in your rear was calling you back. There did Allah give you one distress after another by way of requital, to teach you not to grieve for (the booty) that had escaped you and for (the ill) that had befallen you. For Allah is well aware of all that ye do.

ثم أنزل عليكم من بعد الغم أمنة نعاسا يغشى طائفة منكم وطائفة قد أهمتهم أنفسهم يظنون بالله غير الحق ظن الجاهلية يقولون هل لنا من الأمر من شيء قل إن الأمر كله لله يخفون في أنفسهم ما لا يبدون لك يقولون لو كان لنا من الأمر شيء ما قتلنا هاهنا قل لو كنتم في بيوتكم لبرز الذين كتب عليهم القتل إلى مضاجعهم وليبتلي الله ما في صدوركم وليمحص ما في قلوبكم والله عليم بذات الصدور
After (the excitement) of the distress, He sent down calm on a band of you overcome with slumber, while another band was stirred to anxiety by their own feelings, Moved by wrong suspicions of Allah-suspicions due to ignorance. They said: "What affair is this of ours?" Say thou: "Indeed, this affair is wholly Allah's." They hide in their minds what they dare not reveal to thee. They say (to themselves): "If we had had anything to do with this affair, We should not have been in the slaughter here." Say: "Even if you had remained in your homes, those for whom death was decreed would certainly have gone forth to the place of their death"; but (all this was) that Allah might test what is in your breasts and purge what is in your hearts. For Allah knoweth well the secrets of your hearts.

إن الذين تولوا منكم يوم التقى الجمعان إنما استزلهم الشيطان ببعض ما كسبوا ولقد عفا الله عنهم إن الله غفور حليم
Those of you who turned back on the day the two hosts Met,-it was Satan who caused them to fail, because of some (evil) they had done. But Allah Has blotted out (their fault): For Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Forbearing.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تكونوا كالذين كفروا وقالوا لإخوانهم إذا ضربوا في الأرض أو كانوا غزى لو كانوا عندنا ما ماتوا وما قتلوا ليجعل الله ذلك حسرة في قلوبهم والله يحيي ويميت والله بما تعملون بصير
O ye who believe! Be not like the Unbelievers, who say of their brethren, when they are travelling through the Earth or engaged in fighting: "If they had stayed with us, they would not have died, or been slain." This that Allah may make it a cause of sighs and regrets in their hearts. It is Allah that gives Life and Death, and Allah sees well all that ye do.

ولئن قتلتم في سبيل الله أو متم لمغفرة من الله ورحمة خير مما يجمعون
And if ye are slain, or die, in the way of Allah, forgiveness and mercy from Allah are far better than all they could amass.

ولئن متم أو قتلتم لإلى الله تحشرون
And if ye die, or are slain, Lo! it is unto Allah that ye are brought together.

فبما رحمة من الله لنت لهم ولو كنت فظا غليظ القلب لانفضوا من حولك فاعف عنهم واستغفر لهم وشاورهم في الأمر فإذا عزمت فتوكل على الله إن الله يحب المتوكلين
It is part of the Mercy of Allah that thou dost deal gently with them Wert thou severe or harsh-hearted, they would have broken away from about thee: so pass over (Their faults), and ask for (Allah's) forgiveness for them; and consult them in affairs (of moment). Then, when thou hast Taken a decision put thy trust in Allah. For Allah loves those who put their trust (in Him).

إن ينصركم الله فلا غالب لكم وإن يخذلكم فمن ذا الذي ينصركم من بعده وعلى الله فليتوكل المؤمنون
If Allah helps you, none can overcome you: If He forsakes you, who is there, after that, that can help you? in Allah, then, Let believers put their trust.

وما كان لنبي أن يغل ومن يغلل يأت بما غل يوم القيامة ثم توفى كل نفس ما كسبت وهم لا يظلمون
No prophet could (ever) be false to his trust. If any person is so false, He shall, on the Day of Judgment, restore what he misappropriated; then shall every soul receive its due,- whatever it earned,- and none shall be dealt with unjustly.

أفمن اتبع رضوان الله كمن باء بسخط من الله ومأواه جهنم وبئس المصير
Is the man who follows the good pleasure of Allah Like the man who draws on himself the wrath of Allah, and whose abode is in Hell?- A woeful refuge!

هم درجات عند الله والله بصير بما يعملون
They are in varying gardens in the sight of Allah, and Allah sees well all that they do.

لقد من الله على المؤمنين إذ بعث فيهم رسولا من أنفسهم يتلو عليهم آياته ويزكيهم ويعلمهم الكتاب والحكمة وإن كانوا من قبل لفي ضلال مبين
Allah did confer a great favour on the believers when He sent among them a messenger from among themselves, rehearsing unto them the Signs of Allah, sanctifying them, and instructing them in Scripture and Wisdom, while, before that, they had been in manifest error.

أولما أصابتكم مصيبة قد أصبتم مثليها قلتم أنى هذا قل هو من عند أنفسكم إن الله على كل شيء قدير
What! When a single disaster smites you, although ye smote (your enemies) with one twice as great, do ye say?- "Whence is this?" Say (to them): "It is from yourselves: For Allah hath power over all things."

وما أصابكم يوم التقى الجمعان فبإذن الله وليعلم المؤمنين
What ye suffered on the day the two armies Met, was with the leave of Allah, in order that He might test the believers,-

وليعلم الذين نافقوا وقيل لهم تعالوا قاتلوا في سبيل الله أو ادفعوا قالوا لو نعلم قتالا لاتبعناكم هم للكفر يومئذ أقرب منهم للإيمان يقولون بأفواههم ما ليس في قلوبهم والله أعلم بما يكتمون
And the Hypocrites also. These were told: "Come, fight in the way of Allah, or (at least) drive (The foe from your city)." They said: "Had we known how to fight, we should certainly have followed you." They were that day nearer to Unbelief than to Faith, saying with their lips what was not in their hearts but Allah hath full knowledge of all they conceal.

الذين قالوا لإخوانهم وقعدوا لو أطاعونا ما قتلوا قل فادرءوا عن أنفسكم الموت إن كنتم صادقين
(They are) the ones that say, (of their brethren slain), while they themselves sit (at ease): "If only they had listened to us they would not have been slain." Say: "Avert death from your own selves, if ye speak the truth."

ولا تحسبن الذين قتلوا في سبيل الله أمواتا بل أحياء عند ربهم يرزقون
Think not of those who are slain in Allah's way as dead. Nay, they live, finding their sustenance in the presence of their Lord;

فرحين بما آتاهم الله من فضله ويستبشرون بالذين لم يلحقوا بهم من خلفهم ألا خوف عليهم ولا هم يحزنون
They rejoice in the bounty provided by Allah: And with regard to those left behind, who have not yet joined them (in their bliss), the (Martyrs) glory in the fact that on them is no fear, nor have they (cause to) grieve.

يستبشرون بنعمة من الله وفضل وأن الله لا يضيع أجر المؤمنين
They glory in the Grace and the bounty from Allah, and in the fact that Allah suffereth not the reward of the Faithful to be lost (in the least).

الذين استجابوا لله والرسول من بعد ما أصابهم القرح للذين أحسنوا منهم واتقوا أجر عظيم
Of those who answered the call of Allah and the Messenger, even after being wounded, those who do right and refrain from wrong have a great reward;-

الذين قال لهم الناس إن الناس قد جمعوا لكم فاخشوهم فزادهم إيمانا وقالوا حسبنا الله ونعم الوكيل
Men said to them: "A great army is gathering against you": And frightened them: But it (only) increased their Faith: They said: "For us Allah sufficeth, and He is the best disposer of affairs."

فانقلبوا بنعمة من الله وفضل لم يمسسهم سوء واتبعوا رضوان الله والله ذو فضل عظيم
And they returned with Grace and bounty from Allah: no harm ever touched them: For they followed the good pleasure of Allah: And Allah is the Lord of bounties unbounded.

إنما ذلكم الشيطان يخوف أولياءه فلا تخافوهم وخافون إن كنتم مؤمنين
It is only the Evil One that suggests to you the fear of his votaries: Be ye not afraid of them, but fear Me, if ye have Faith.

ولا يحزنك الذين يسارعون في الكفر إنهم لن يضروا الله شيئا يريد الله ألا يجعل لهم حظا في الآخرة ولهم عذاب عظيم
Let not those grieve thee who rush headlong into Unbelief: Not the least harm will they do to Allah: Allah's plan is that He will give them no portion in the Hereafter, but a severe punishment.

إن الذين اشتروا الكفر بالإيمان لن يضروا الله شيئا ولهم عذاب أليم
Those who purchase Unbelief at the price of faith,- not the least harm will they do to Allah, but they will have a grievous punishment.

ولا يحسبن الذين كفروا أنما نملي لهم خير لأنفسهم إنما نملي لهم ليزدادوا إثما ولهم عذاب مهين
Let not the Unbelievers think that our respite to them is good for themselves: We grant them respite that they may grow in their iniquity: But they will have a shameful punishment.

ما كان الله ليذر المؤمنين على ما أنتم عليه حتى يميز الخبيث من الطيب وما كان الله ليطلعكم على الغيب ولكن الله يجتبي من رسله من يشاء فآمنوا بالله ورسله وإن تؤمنوا وتتقوا فلكم أجر عظيم
Allah will not leave the believers in the state in which ye are now, until He separates what is evil from what is good nor will He disclose to you the secrets of the Unseen. But He chooses of His Messengers (For the purpose) whom He pleases. So believe in Allah. And His messengers: And if ye believe and do right, ye have a reward without measure.

ولا يحسبن الذين يبخلون بما آتاهم الله من فضله هو خيرا لهم بل هو شر لهم سيطوقون ما بخلوا به يوم القيامة ولله ميراث السماوات والأرض والله بما تعملون خبير
And let not those who covetously withhold of the gifts which Allah Hath given them of His Grace, think that it is good for them: Nay, it will be the worse for them: soon shall the things which they covetously withheld be tied to their necks Like a twisted collar, on the Day of Judgment. To Allah belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth; and Allah is well-acquainted with all that ye do.

لقد سمع الله قول الذين قالوا إن الله فقير ونحن أغنياء سنكتب ما قالوا وقتلهم الأنبياء بغير حق ونقول ذوقوا عذاب الحريق
Allah hath heard the taunt of those who say: "Truly, Allah is indigent and we are rich!"- We shall certainly record their word and (their act) of slaying the prophets in defiance of right, and We shall say: "Taste ye the penalty of the Scorching Fire!

ذلك بما قدمت أيديكم وأن الله ليس بظلام للعبيد
"This is because of the (unrighteous deeds) which your hands sent on before ye: For Allah never harms those who serve Him."

الذين قالوا إن الله عهد إلينا ألا نؤمن لرسول حتى يأتينا بقربان تأكله النار قل قد جاءكم رسل من قبلي بالبينات وبالذي قلتم فلم قتلتموهم إن كنتم صادقين
They (also) said: "Allah took our promise not to believe in an messenger unless He showed us a sacrifice consumed by Fire (From heaven)." Say: "There came to you messengers before me, with clear Signs and even with what ye ask for: why then did ye slay them, if ye speak the truth?"

فإن كذبوك فقد كذب رسل من قبلك جاءوا بالبينات والزبر والكتاب المنير
Then if they reject thee, so were rejected messengers before thee, who came with Clear Signs, Books of dark prophecies, and the Book of Enlightenment.

كل نفس ذائقة الموت وإنما توفون أجوركم يوم القيامة فمن زحزح عن النار وأدخل الجنة فقد فاز وما الحياة الدنيا إلا متاع الغرور
Every soul shall have a taste of death: And only on the Day of Judgment shall you be paid your full recompense. Only he who is saved far from the Fire and admitted to the Garden will have attained the object (of Life): For the life of this world is but goods and chattels of deception.

لتبلون في أموالكم وأنفسكم ولتسمعن من الذين أوتوا الكتاب من قبلكم ومن الذين أشركوا أذى كثيرا وإن تصبروا وتتقوا فإن ذلك من عزم الأمور
Ye shall certainly be tried and tested in your possessions and in your personal selves; and ye shall certainly Hear much that will grieve you, from those who received the Book before you and from those who worship many gods. But if ye persevere patiently, and guard against evil,-then that will be a determining factor in all affairs.

وإذ أخذ الله ميثاق الذين أوتوا الكتاب لتبيننه للناس ولا تكتمونه فنبذوه وراء ظهورهم واشتروا به ثمنا قليلا فبئس ما يشترون
And remember Allah took a covenant from the People of the Book, to make it known and clear to mankind, and not to hide it; but they threw it away behind their backs, and purchased with it some miserable gain! And vile was the bargain they made!

لا تحسبن الذين يفرحون بما أتوا ويحبون أن يحمدوا بما لم يفعلوا فلا تحسبنهم بمفازة من العذاب ولهم عذاب أليم
Think not that those who exult in what they have brought about, and love to be praised for what they have not done,- think escape the penalty. For them is a penalty Grievous indeed.

ولله ملك السماوات والأرض والله على كل شيء قدير
To Allah belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth; and Allah hath power over all things.

إن في خلق السماوات والأرض واختلاف الليل والنهار لآيات لأولي الألباب
Behold! in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the alternation of night and day,- there are indeed Signs for men of understanding,-

الذين يذكرون الله قياما وقعودا وعلى جنوبهم ويتفكرون في خلق السماوات والأرض ربنا ما خلقت هذا باطلا سبحانك فقنا عذاب النار
Men who celebrate the praises of Allah, standing, sitting, and lying down on their sides, and contemplate the (wonders of) creation in the heavens and the earth, (With the thought): "Our Lord! not for naught Hast Thou created (all) this! Glory to Thee! Give us salvation from the penalty of the Fire.

ربنا إنك من تدخل النار فقد أخزيته وما للظالمين من أنصار
"Our Lord! any whom Thou dost admit to the Fire, Truly Thou coverest with shame, and never will wrong-doers Find any helpers!

ربنا إننا سمعنا مناديا ينادي للإيمان أن آمنوا بربكم فآمنا ربنا فاغفر لنا ذنوبنا وكفر عنا سيئاتنا وتوفنا مع الأبرار
"Our Lord! we have heard the call of one calling (Us) to Faith, 'Believe ye in the Lord,' and we have believed. Our Lord! Forgive us our sins, blot out from us our iniquities, and take to Thyself our souls in the company of the righteous.

ربنا وآتنا ما وعدتنا على رسلك ولا تخزنا يوم القيامة إنك لا تخلف الميعاد
"Our Lord! Grant us what Thou didst promise unto us through Thine messengers, and save us from shame on the Day of Judgment: For Thou never breakest Thy promise."

فاستجاب لهم ربهم أني لا أضيع عمل عامل منكم من ذكر أو أنثى بعضكم من بعض فالذين هاجروا وأخرجوا من ديارهم وأوذوا في سبيلي وقاتلوا وقتلوا لأكفرن عنهم سيئاتهم ولأدخلنهم جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار ثوابا من عند الله والله عنده حسن الثواب
And their Lord hath accepted of them, and answered them: "Never will I suffer to be lost the work of any of you, be he male or female: Ye are members, one of another: Those who have left their homes, or been driven out therefrom, or suffered harm in My Cause, or fought or been slain,- verily, I will blot out from them their iniquities, and admit them into Gardens with rivers flowing beneath;- A reward from the presence of Allah, and from His presence is the best of rewards."

لا يغرنك تقلب الذين كفروا في البلاد
Let not the strutting about of the Unbelievers through the land deceive thee:

متاع قليل ثم مأواهم جهنم وبئس المهاد
Little is it for enjoyment: Their ultimate abode is Hell: what an evil bed (To lie on)!

لكن الذين اتقوا ربهم لهم جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها نزلا من عند الله وما عند الله خير للأبرار
On the other hand, for those who fear their Lord, are Gardens, with rivers flowing beneath; therein are they to dwell (for ever),- a gift from the presence of Allah; and that which is in the presence of Allah is the best (bliss) for the righteous.

وإن من أهل الكتاب لمن يؤمن بالله وما أنزل إليكم وما أنزل إليهم خاشعين لله لا يشترون بآيات الله ثمنا قليلا أولئك لهم أجرهم عند ربهم إن الله سريع الحساب
And there are, certainly, among the People of the Book, those who believe in Allah, in the revelation to you, and in the revelation to them, bowing in humility to Allah: They will not sell the Signs of Allah for a miserable gain! For them is a reward with their Lord, and Allah is swift in account.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا اصبروا وصابروا ورابطوا واتقوا الله لعلكم تفلحون
O ye who believe! Persevere in patience and constancy; vie in such perseverance; strengthen each other; and fear Allah; that ye may prosper.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم يا أيها الناس اتقوا ربكم الذي خلقكم من نفس واحدة وخلق منها زوجها وبث منهما رجالا كثيرا ونساء واتقوا الله الذي تساءلون به والأرحام إن الله كان عليكم رقيبا
O mankind! reverence your Guardian-Lord, who created you from a single person, created, of like nature, His mate, and from them twain scattered (like seeds) countless men and women;- reverence Allah, through whom ye demand your mutual (rights), and (reverence) the wombs (That bore you): for Allah ever watches over you.

وآتوا اليتامى أموالهم ولا تتبدلوا الخبيث بالطيب ولا تأكلوا أموالهم إلى أموالكم إنه كان حوبا كبيرا
To orphans restore their property (When they reach their age), nor substitute (your) worthless things for (their) good ones; and devour not their substance (by mixing it up) with your own. For this is indeed a great sin.

وإن خفتم ألا تقسطوا في اليتامى فانكحوا ما طاب لكم من النساء مثنى وثلاث ورباع فإن خفتم ألا تعدلوا فواحدة أو ما ملكت أيمانكم ذلك أدنى ألا تعولوا
If ye fear that ye shall not be able to deal justly with the orphans, Marry women of your choice, Two or three or four; but if ye fear that ye shall not be able to deal justly (with them), then only one, or (a captive) that your right hands possess, that will be more suitable, to prevent you from doing injustice.

وآتوا النساء صدقاتهن نحلة فإن طبن لكم عن شيء منه نفسا فكلوه هنيئا مريئا
And give the women (on marriage) their dower as a free gift; but if they, of their own good pleasure, remit any part of it to you, Take it and enjoy it with right good cheer.

ولا تؤتوا السفهاء أموالكم التي جعل الله لكم قياما وارزقوهم فيها واكسوهم وقولوا لهم قولا معروفا
To those weak of understanding Make not over your property, which Allah hath made a means of support for you, but feed and clothe them therewith, and speak to them words of kindness and justice.

وابتلوا اليتامى حتى إذا بلغوا النكاح فإن آنستم منهم رشدا فادفعوا إليهم أموالهم ولا تأكلوها إسرافا وبدارا أن يكبروا ومن كان غنيا فليستعفف ومن كان فقيرا فليأكل بالمعروف فإذا دفعتم إليهم أموالهم فأشهدوا عليهم وكفى بالله حسيبا
Make trial of orphans until they reach the age of marriage; if then ye find sound judgment in them, release their property to them; but consume it not wastefully, nor in haste against their growing up. If the guardian is well-off, Let him claim no remuneration, but if he is poor, let him have for himself what is just and reasonable. When ye release their property to them, take witnesses in their presence: But all-sufficient is Allah in taking account.

للرجال نصيب مما ترك الوالدان والأقربون وللنساء نصيب مما ترك الوالدان والأقربون مما قل منه أو كثر نصيبا مفروضا
From what is left by parents and those nearest related there is a share for men and a share for women, whether the property be small or large,-a determinate share.

وإذا حضر القسمة أولو القربى واليتامى والمساكين فارزقوهم منه وقولوا لهم قولا معروفا
But if at the time of division other relatives, or orphans or poor, are present, feed them out of the (property), and speak to them words of kindness and justice.

وليخش الذين لو تركوا من خلفهم ذرية ضعافا خافوا عليهم فليتقوا الله وليقولوا قولا سديدا
Let those (disposing of an estate) have the same fear in their minds as they would have for their own if they had left a helpless family behind: Let them fear Allah, and speak words of appropriate (comfort).

إن الذين يأكلون أموال اليتامى ظلما إنما يأكلون في بطونهم نارا وسيصلون سعيرا
Those who unjustly eat up the property of orphans, eat up a Fire into their own bodies: They will soon be enduring a Blazing Fire!

يوصيكم الله في أولادكم للذكر مثل حظ الأنثيين فإن كن نساء فوق اثنتين فلهن ثلثا ما ترك وإن كانت واحدة فلها النصف ولأبويه لكل واحد منهما السدس مما ترك إن كان له ولد فإن لم يكن له ولد وورثه أبواه فلأمه الثلث فإن كان له إخوة فلأمه السدس من بعد وصية يوصي بها أو دين آباؤكم وأبناؤكم لا تدرون أيهم أقرب لكم نفعا فريضة من الله إن الله كان عليما حكيما
Allah (thus) directs you as regards your Children's (Inheritance): to the male, a portion equal to that of two females: if only daughters, two or more, their share is two-thirds of the inheritance; if only one, her share is a half. For parents, a sixth share of the inheritance to each, if the deceased left children; if no children, and the parents are the (only) heirs, the mother has a third; if the deceased Left brothers (or sisters) the mother has a sixth. (The distribution in all cases ('s) after the payment of legacies and debts. Ye know not whether your parents or your children are nearest to you in benefit. These are settled portions ordained by Allah; and Allah is All-knowing, Al-wise.

ولكم نصف ما ترك أزواجكم إن لم يكن لهن ولد فإن كان لهن ولد فلكم الربع مما تركن من بعد وصية يوصين بها أو دين ولهن الربع مما تركتم إن لم يكن لكم ولد فإن كان لكم ولد فلهن الثمن مما تركتم من بعد وصية توصون بها أو دين وإن كان رجل يورث كلالة أو امرأة وله أخ أو أخت فلكل واحد منهما السدس فإن كانوا أكثر من ذلك فهم شركاء في الثلث من بعد وصية يوصى بها أو دين غير مضار وصية من الله والله عليم حليم
In what your wives leave, your share is a half, if they leave no child; but if they leave a child, ye get a fourth; after payment of legacies and debts. In what ye leave, their share is a fourth, if ye leave no child; but if ye leave a child, they get an eighth; after payment of legacies and debts. If the man or woman whose inheritance is in question, has left neither ascendants nor descendants, but has left a brother or a sister, each one of the two gets a sixth; but if more than two, they share in a third; after payment of legacies and debts; so that no loss is caused (to any one). Thus is it ordained by Allah; and Allah is All-knowing, Most Forbearing.

تلك حدود الله ومن يطع الله ورسوله يدخله جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها وذلك الفوز العظيم
Those are limits set by Allah: those who obey Allah and His Messenger will be admitted to Gardens with rivers flowing beneath, to abide therein (for ever) and that will be the supreme achievement.

ومن يعص الله ورسوله ويتعد حدوده يدخله نارا خالدا فيها وله عذاب مهين
But those who disobey Allah and His Messenger and transgress His limits will be admitted to a Fire, to abide therein: And they shall have a humiliating punishment.

واللاتي يأتين الفاحشة من نسائكم فاستشهدوا عليهن أربعة منكم فإن شهدوا فأمسكوهن في البيوت حتى يتوفاهن الموت أو يجعل الله لهن سبيلا
If any of your women are guilty of lewdness, Take the evidence of four (Reliable) witnesses from amongst you against them; and if they testify, confine them to houses until death do claim them, or Allah ordain for them some (other) way.

واللذان يأتيانها منكم فآذوهما فإن تابا وأصلحا فأعرضوا عنهما إن الله كان توابا رحيما
If two men among you are guilty of lewdness, punish them both. If they repent and amend, Leave them alone; for Allah is Oft-returning, Most Merciful.

إنما التوبة على الله للذين يعملون السوء بجهالة ثم يتوبون من قريب فأولئك يتوب الله عليهم وكان الله عليما حكيما
Allah accept the repentance of those who do evil in ignorance and repent soon afterwards; to them will Allah turn in mercy: For Allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.

وليست التوبة للذين يعملون السيئات حتى إذا حضر أحدهم الموت قال إني تبت الآن ولا الذين يموتون وهم كفار أولئك أعتدنا لهم عذابا أليما
Of no effect is the repentance of those who continue to do evil, until death faces one of them, and he says, "Now have I repented indeed;" nor of those who die rejecting Faith: for them have We prepared a punishment most grievous.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا يحل لكم أن ترثوا النساء كرها ولا تعضلوهن لتذهبوا ببعض ما آتيتموهن إلا أن يأتين بفاحشة مبينة وعاشروهن بالمعروف فإن كرهتموهن فعسى أن تكرهوا شيئا ويجعل الله فيه خيرا كثيرا
O ye who believe! Ye are forbidden to inherit women against their will. Nor should ye treat them with harshness, that ye may Take away part of the dower ye have given them,-except where they have been guilty of open lewdness; on the contrary live with them on a footing of kindness and equity. If ye take a dislike to them it may be that ye dislike a thing, and Allah brings about through it a great deal of good.

وإن أردتم استبدال زوج مكان زوج وآتيتم إحداهن قنطارا فلا تأخذوا منه شيئا أتأخذونه بهتانا وإثما مبينا
But if ye decide to take one wife in place of another, even if ye had given the latter a whole treasure for dower, Take not the least bit of it back: Would ye take it by slander and manifest wrong?

وكيف تأخذونه وقد أفضى بعضكم إلى بعض وأخذن منكم ميثاقا غليظا
And how could ye take it when ye have gone in unto each other, and they have Taken from you a solemn covenant?

ولا تنكحوا ما نكح آباؤكم من النساء إلا ما قد سلف إنه كان فاحشة ومقتا وساء سبيلا
And marry not women whom your fathers married,- except what is past: It was shameful and odious,- an abominable custom indeed.

حرمت عليكم أمهاتكم وبناتكم وأخواتكم وعماتكم وخالاتكم وبنات الأخ وبنات الأخت وأمهاتكم اللاتي أرضعنكم وأخواتكم من الرضاعة وأمهات نسائكم وربائبكم اللاتي في حجوركم من نسائكم اللاتي دخلتم بهن فإن لم تكونوا دخلتم بهن فلا جناح عليكم وحلائل أبنائكم الذين من أصلابكم وأن تجمعوا بين الأختين إلا ما قد سلف إن الله كان غفورا رحيما
Prohibited to you (For marriage) are:- Your mothers, daughters, sisters; father's sisters, Mother's sisters; brother's daughters, sister's daughters; foster-mothers (Who gave you suck), foster-sisters; your wives' mothers; your step-daughters under your guardianship, born of your wives to whom ye have gone in,- no prohibition if ye have not gone in;- (Those who have been) wives of your sons proceeding from your loins; and two sisters in wedlock at one and the same time, except for what is past; for Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful;-

والمحصنات من النساء إلا ما ملكت أيمانكم كتاب الله عليكم وأحل لكم ما وراء ذلكم أن تبتغوا بأموالكم محصنين غير مسافحين فما استمتعتم به منهن فآتوهن أجورهن فريضة ولا جناح عليكم فيما تراضيتم به من بعد الفريضة إن الله كان عليما حكيما
Also (prohibited are) women already married, except those whom your right hands possess: Thus hath Allah ordained (Prohibitions) against you: Except for these, all others are lawful, provided ye seek (them in marriage) with gifts from your property,- desiring chastity, not lust, seeing that ye derive benefit from them, give them their dowers (at least) as prescribed; but if, after a dower is prescribed, agree Mutually (to vary it), there is no blame on you, and Allah is All-knowing, All-wise.

ومن لم يستطع منكم طولا أن ينكح المحصنات المؤمنات فمن ما ملكت أيمانكم من فتياتكم المؤمنات والله أعلم بإيمانكم بعضكم من بعض فانكحوهن بإذن أهلهن وآتوهن أجورهن بالمعروف محصنات غير مسافحات ولا متخذات أخدان فإذا أحصن فإن أتين بفاحشة فعليهن نصف ما على المحصنات من العذاب ذلك لمن خشي العنت منكم وأن تصبروا خير لكم والله غفور رحيم
If any of you have not the means wherewith to wed free believing women, they may wed believing girls from among those whom your right hands possess: And Allah hath full knowledge about your faith. Ye are one from another: Wed them with the leave of their owners, and give them their dowers, according to what is reasonable: They should be chaste, not lustful, nor taking paramours: when they are taken in wedlock, if they fall into shame, their punishment is half that for free women. This (permission) is for those among you who fear sin; but it is better for you that ye practise self-restraint. And Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

يريد الله ليبين لكم ويهديكم سنن الذين من قبلكم ويتوب عليكم والله عليم حكيم
Allah doth wish to make clear to you and to show you the ordinances of those before you; and (He doth wish to) turn to you (In Mercy): And Allah is All-knowing, All-wise.

والله يريد أن يتوب عليكم ويريد الذين يتبعون الشهوات أن تميلوا ميلا عظيما
Allah doth wish to Turn to you, but the wish of those who follow their lusts is that ye should turn away (from Him),- far, far away.

يريد الله أن يخفف عنكم وخلق الإنسان ضعيفا
Allah doth wish to lighten your (difficulties): For man was created Weak (in flesh).

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تأكلوا أموالكم بينكم بالباطل إلا أن تكون تجارة عن تراض منكم ولا تقتلوا أنفسكم إن الله كان بكم رحيما
O ye who believe! Eat not up your property among yourselves in vanities: But let there be amongst you Traffic and trade by mutual good-will: Nor kill (or destroy) yourselves: for verily Allah hath been to you Most Merciful!

ومن يفعل ذلك عدوانا وظلما فسوف نصليه نارا وكان ذلك على الله يسيرا
If any do that in rancour and injustice,- soon shall We cast them into the Fire: And easy it is for Allah.

إن تجتنبوا كبائر ما تنهون عنه نكفر عنكم سيئاتكم وندخلكم مدخلا كريما
If ye (but) eschew the most heinous of the things which ye are forbidden to do, We shall expel out of you all the evil in you, and admit you to a gate of great honour.

ولا تتمنوا ما فضل الله به بعضكم على بعض للرجال نصيب مما اكتسبوا وللنساء نصيب مما اكتسبن واسألوا الله من فضله إن الله كان بكل شيء عليما
And in no wise covet those things in which Allah Hath bestowed His gifts More freely on some of you than on others: To men is allotted what they earn, and to women what they earn: But ask Allah of His bounty. For Allah hath full knowledge of all things.

ولكل جعلنا موالي مما ترك الوالدان والأقربون والذين عقدت أيمانكم فآتوهم نصيبهم إن الله كان على كل شيء شهيدا
To (benefit) every one, We have appointed shares and heirs to property left by parents and relatives. To those, also, to whom your right hand was pledged, give their due portion. For truly Allah is witness to all things.

الرجال قوامون على النساء بما فضل الله بعضهم على بعض وبما أنفقوا من أموالهم فالصالحات قانتات حافظات للغيب بما حفظ الله واللاتي تخافون نشوزهن فعظوهن واهجروهن في المضاجع واضربوهن فإن أطعنكم فلا تبغوا عليهن سبيلا إن الله كان عليا كبيرا
Men are the protectors and maintainers of women, because Allah has given the one more (strength) than the other, and because they support them from their means. Therefore the righteous women are devoutly obedient, and guard in (the husband's) absence what Allah would have them guard. As to those women on whose part ye fear disloyalty and ill-conduct, admonish them (first), (Next), refuse to share their beds, (And last) beat them (lightly); but if they return to obedience, seek not against them Means (of annoyance): For Allah is Most High, great (above you all).

وإن خفتم شقاق بينهما فابعثوا حكما من أهله وحكما من أهلها إن يريدا إصلاحا يوفق الله بينهما إن الله كان عليما خبيرا
If ye fear a breach between them twain, appoint (two) arbiters, one from his family, and the other from hers; if they wish for peace, Allah will cause their reconciliation: For Allah hath full knowledge, and is acquainted with all things.

واعبدوا الله ولا تشركوا به شيئا وبالوالدين إحسانا وبذي القربى واليتامى والمساكين والجار ذي القربى والجار الجنب والصاحب بالجنب وابن السبيل وما ملكت أيمانكم إن الله لا يحب من كان مختالا فخورا
Serve Allah, and join not any partners with Him; and do good- to parents, kinsfolk, orphans, those in need, neighbours who are near, neighbours who are strangers, the companion by your side, the wayfarer (ye meet), and what your right hands possess: For Allah loveth not the arrogant, the vainglorious;-

الذين يبخلون ويأمرون الناس بالبخل ويكتمون ما آتاهم الله من فضله وأعتدنا للكافرين عذابا مهينا
(Nor) those who are niggardly or enjoin niggardliness on others, or hide the bounties which Allah hath bestowed on them; for We have prepared, for those who resist Faith, a punishment that steeps them in contempt;-

والذين ينفقون أموالهم رئاء الناس ولا يؤمنون بالله ولا باليوم الآخر ومن يكن الشيطان له قرينا فساء قرينا
Not those who spend of their substance, to be seen of men, but have no faith in Allah and the Last Day: If any take the Evil One for their intimate, what a dreadful intimate he is!

وماذا عليهم لو آمنوا بالله واليوم الآخر وأنفقوا مما رزقهم الله وكان الله بهم عليما
And what burden Were it on them if they had faith in Allah and in the Last Day, and they spent out of what Allah hath given them for sustenance? For Allah hath full knowledge of them.

إن الله لا يظلم مثقال ذرة وإن تك حسنة يضاعفها ويؤت من لدنه أجرا عظيما
Allah is never unjust in the least degree: If there is any good (done), He doubleth it, and giveth from His own presence a great reward.

فكيف إذا جئنا من كل أمة بشهيد وجئنا بك على هؤلاء شهيدا
How then if We brought from each people a witness, and We brought thee as a witness against these people!

يومئذ يود الذين كفروا وعصوا الرسول لو تسوى بهم الأرض ولا يكتمون الله حديثا
On that day those who reject Faith and disobey the messenger will wish that the earth Were made one with them: But never will they hide a single fact from Allah!

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تقربوا الصلاة وأنتم سكارى حتى تعلموا ما تقولون ولا جنبا إلا عابري سبيل حتى تغتسلوا وإن كنتم مرضى أو على سفر أو جاء أحد منكم من الغائط أو لامستم النساء فلم تجدوا ماء فتيمموا صعيدا طيبا فامسحوا بوجوهكم وأيديكم إن الله كان عفوا غفورا
O ye who believe! Approach not prayers with a mind befogged, until ye can understand all that ye say,- nor in a state of ceremonial impurity (Except when travelling on the road), until after washing your whole body. If ye are ill, or on a journey, or one of you cometh from offices of nature, or ye have been in contact with women, and ye find no water, then take for yourselves clean sand or earth, and rub therewith your faces and hands. For Allah doth blot out sins and forgive again and again.

ألم تر إلى الذين أوتوا نصيبا من الكتاب يشترون الضلالة ويريدون أن تضلوا السبيل
Hast thou not turned Thy vision to those who were given a portion of the Book? they traffic in error, and wish that ye should lose the right path.

والله أعلم بأعدائكم وكفى بالله وليا وكفى بالله نصيرا
But Allah hath full knowledge of your enemies: Allah is enough for a protector, and Allah is enough for a Helper.

من الذين هادوا يحرفون الكلم عن مواضعه ويقولون سمعنا وعصينا واسمع غير مسمع وراعنا ليا بألسنتهم وطعنا في الدين ولو أنهم قالوا سمعنا وأطعنا واسمع وانظرنا لكان خيرا لهم وأقوم ولكن لعنهم الله بكفرهم فلا يؤمنون إلا قليلا
Of the Jews there are those who displace words from their (right) places, and say: "We hear and we disobey"; and "Hear what is not Heard"; and "Ra'ina"; with a twist of their tongues and a slander to Faith. If only they had said: "What hear and we obey"; and "Do hear"; and "Do look at us"; it would have been better for them, and more proper; but Allah hath cursed them for their Unbelief; and but few of them will believe.

يا أيها الذين أوتوا الكتاب آمنوا بما نزلنا مصدقا لما معكم من قبل أن نطمس وجوها فنردها على أدبارها أو نلعنهم كما لعنا أصحاب السبت وكان أمر الله مفعولا
O ye People of the Book! believe in what We have (now) revealed, confirming what was (already) with you, before We change the face and fame of some (of you) beyond all recognition, and turn them hindwards, or curse them as We cursed the Sabbath-breakers, for the decision of Allah Must be carried out.

إن الله لا يغفر أن يشرك به ويغفر ما دون ذلك لمن يشاء ومن يشرك بالله فقد افترى إثما عظيما
Allah forgiveth not that partners should be set up with Him; but He forgiveth anything else, to whom He pleaseth; to set up partners with Allah is to devise a sin Most heinous indeed.

ألم تر إلى الذين يزكون أنفسهم بل الله يزكي من يشاء ولا يظلمون فتيلا
Hast thou not turned Thy vision to those who claim sanctity for themselves? Nay-but Allah Doth sanctify whom He pleaseth. But never will they fail to receive justice in the least little thing.

انظر كيف يفترون على الله الكذب وكفى به إثما مبينا
Behold! how they invent a lie against Allah! but that by itself is a manifest sin!

ألم تر إلى الذين أوتوا نصيبا من الكتاب يؤمنون بالجبت والطاغوت ويقولون للذين كفروا هؤلاء أهدى من الذين آمنوا سبيلا
Hast thou not turned Thy vision to those who were given a portion of the Book? they believe in sorcery and Evil, and say to the Unbelievers that they are better guided in the (right) way Than the believers!

أولئك الذين لعنهم الله ومن يلعن الله فلن تجد له نصيرا
They are (men) whom Allah hath cursed: And those whom Allah Hath cursed, thou wilt find, have no one to help.

أم لهم نصيب من الملك فإذا لا يؤتون الناس نقيرا
Have they a share in dominion or power? Behold, they give not a farthing to their fellow-men?

أم يحسدون الناس على ما آتاهم الله من فضله فقد آتينا آل إبراهيم الكتاب والحكمة وآتيناهم ملكا عظيما
Or do they envy mankind for what Allah hath given them of his bounty? but We had already given the people of Abraham the Book and Wisdom, and conferred upon them a great kingdom.

فمنهم من آمن به ومنهم من صد عنه وكفى بجهنم سعيرا
Some of them believed, and some of them averted their faces from him: And enough is Hell for a burning fire.

إن الذين كفروا بآياتنا سوف نصليهم نارا كلما نضجت جلودهم بدلناهم جلودا غيرها ليذوقوا العذاب إن الله كان عزيزا حكيما
Those who reject our Signs, We shall soon cast into the Fire: as often as their skins are roasted through, We shall change them for fresh skins, that they may taste the penalty: for Allah is Exalted in Power, Wise.

والذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات سندخلهم جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها أبدا لهم فيها أزواج مطهرة وندخلهم ظلا ظليلا
But those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, We shall soon admit to Gardens, with rivers flowing beneath,- their eternal home: Therein shall they have companions pure and holy: We shall admit them to shades, cool and ever deepening.

إن الله يأمركم أن تؤدوا الأمانات إلى أهلها وإذا حكمتم بين الناس أن تحكموا بالعدل إن الله نعما يعظكم به إن الله كان سميعا بصيرا
Allah doth command you to render back your Trusts to those to whom they are due; And when ye judge between man and man, that ye judge with justice: Verily how excellent is the teaching which He giveth you! For Allah is He Who heareth and seeth all things.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا أطيعوا الله وأطيعوا الرسول وأولي الأمر منكم فإن تنازعتم في شيء فردوه إلى الله والرسول إن كنتم تؤمنون بالله واليوم الآخر ذلك خير وأحسن تأويلا
O ye who believe! Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger, and those charged with authority among you. If ye differ in anything among yourselves, refer it to Allah and His Messenger, if ye do believe in Allah and the Last Day: That is best, and most suitable for final determination.

ألم تر إلى الذين يزعمون أنهم آمنوا بما أنزل إليك وما أنزل من قبلك يريدون أن يتحاكموا إلى الطاغوت وقد أمروا أن يكفروا به ويريد الشيطان أن يضلهم ضلالا بعيدا
Hast thou not turned Thy vision to those who declare that they believe in the revelations that have come to thee and to those before thee? Their (real) wish is to resort together for judgment (in their disputes) to the Evil One, though they were ordered to reject him. But Satan's wish is to lead them astray far away (from the right).

وإذا قيل لهم تعالوا إلى ما أنزل الله وإلى الرسول رأيت المنافقين يصدون عنك صدودا
When it is said to them: "Come to what Allah hath revealed, and to the Messenger": Thou seest the Hypocrites avert their faces from thee in disgust.

فكيف إذا أصابتهم مصيبة بما قدمت أيديهم ثم جاءوك يحلفون بالله إن أردنا إلا إحسانا وتوفيقا
How then, when they are seized by misfortune, because of the deeds which they hands have sent forth? Then their come to thee, swearing by Allah: "We meant no more than good-will and conciliation!"

أولئك الذين يعلم الله ما في قلوبهم فأعرض عنهم وعظهم وقل لهم في أنفسهم قولا بليغا
Those men,-Allah knows what is in their hearts; so keep clear of them, but admonish them, and speak to them a word to reach their very souls.

وما أرسلنا من رسول إلا ليطاع بإذن الله ولو أنهم إذ ظلموا أنفسهم جاءوك فاستغفروا الله واستغفر لهم الرسول لوجدوا الله توابا رحيما
We sent not a messenger, but to be obeyed, in accordance with the will of Allah. If they had only, when they were unjust to themselves, come unto thee and asked Allah's forgiveness, and the Messenger had asked forgiveness for them, they would have found Allah indeed Oft-returning, Most Merciful.

فلا وربك لا يؤمنون حتى يحكموك فيما شجر بينهم ثم لا يجدوا في أنفسهم حرجا مما قضيت ويسلموا تسليما
But no, by the Lord, they can have no (real) Faith, until they make thee judge in all disputes between them, and find in their souls no resistance against Thy decisions, but accept them with the fullest conviction.

ولو أنا كتبنا عليهم أن اقتلوا أنفسكم أو اخرجوا من دياركم ما فعلوه إلا قليل منهم ولو أنهم فعلوا ما يوعظون به لكان خيرا لهم وأشد تثبيتا
If We had ordered them to sacrifice their lives or to leave their homes, very few of them would have done it: But if they had done what they were (actually) told, it would have been best for them, and would have gone farthest to strengthen their (faith);

وإذا لآتيناهم من لدنا أجرا عظيما
And We should then have given them from our presence a great reward;

ولهديناهم صراطا مستقيما
And We should have shown them the Straight Way.

ومن يطع الله والرسول فأولئك مع الذين أنعم الله عليهم من النبيين والصديقين والشهداء والصالحين وحسن أولئك رفيقا
All who obey Allah and the messenger are in the company of those on whom is the Grace of Allah,- of the prophets (who teach), the sincere (lovers of Truth), the witnesses (who testify), and the Righteous (who do good): Ah! what a beautiful fellowship!

ذلك الفضل من الله وكفى بالله عليما
Such is the bounty from Allah: And sufficient is it that Allah knoweth all.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا خذوا حذركم فانفروا ثبات أو انفروا جميعا
O ye who believe! Take your precautions, and either go forth in parties or go forth all together.

وإن منكم لمن ليبطئن فإن أصابتكم مصيبة قال قد أنعم الله علي إذ لم أكن معهم شهيدا
There are certainly among you men who would tarry behind: If a misfortune befalls you, they say: "Allah did favour us in that we were not present among them."

ولئن أصابكم فضل من الله ليقولن كأن لم تكن بينكم وبينه مودة يا ليتني كنت معهم فأفوز فوزا عظيما
But if good fortune comes to you from Allah, they would be sure to say - as if there had never been Ties of affection between you and them - "Oh! I wish I had been with them; a fine thing should I then have made of it!"

فليقاتل في سبيل الله الذين يشرون الحياة الدنيا بالآخرة ومن يقاتل في سبيل الله فيقتل أو يغلب فسوف نؤتيه أجرا عظيما
Let those fight in the cause of Allah Who sell the life of this world for the hereafter. To him who fighteth in the cause of Allah,- whether he is slain or gets victory - Soon shall We give him a reward of great (value).

وما لكم لا تقاتلون في سبيل الله والمستضعفين من الرجال والنساء والولدان الذين يقولون ربنا أخرجنا من هذه القرية الظالم أهلها واجعل لنا من لدنك وليا واجعل لنا من لدنك نصيرا
And why should ye not fight in the cause of Allah and of those who, being weak, are ill-treated (and oppressed)?- Men, women, and children, whose cry is: "Our Lord! Rescue us from this town, whose people are oppressors; and raise for us from Thee one who will protect; and raise for us from Thee one who will help!"

الذين آمنوا يقاتلون في سبيل الله والذين كفروا يقاتلون في سبيل الطاغوت فقاتلوا أولياء الشيطان إن كيد الشيطان كان ضعيفا
Those who believe fight in the cause of Allah, and those who reject Faith Fight in the cause of Evil: So fight ye against the friends of Satan: feeble indeed is the cunning of Satan.

ألم تر إلى الذين قيل لهم كفوا أيديكم وأقيموا الصلاة وآتوا الزكاة فلما كتب عليهم القتال إذا فريق منهم يخشون الناس كخشية الله أو أشد خشية وقالوا ربنا لم كتبت علينا القتال لولا أخرتنا إلى أجل قريب قل متاع الدنيا قليل والآخرة خير لمن اتقى ولا تظلمون فتيلا
Hast thou not turned Thy vision to those who were told to hold back their hands (from fight) but establish regular prayers and spend in regular charity? When (at length) the order for fighting was issued to them, behold! a section of them feared men as - or even more than - they should have feared Allah: They said: "Our Lord! Why hast Thou ordered us to fight? Wouldst Thou not Grant us respite to our (natural) term, near (enough)?" Say: "Short is the enjoyment of this world: the Hereafter is the best for those who do right: Never will ye be dealt with unjustly in the very least!

أينما تكونوا يدرككم الموت ولو كنتم في بروج مشيدة وإن تصبهم حسنة يقولوا هذه من عند الله وإن تصبهم سيئة يقولوا هذه من عندك قل كل من عند الله فمال هؤلاء القوم لا يكادون يفقهون حديثا
"Wherever ye are, death will find you out, even if ye are in towers built up strong and high!" If some good befalls them, they say, "This is from Allah"; but if evil, they say, "This is from thee" (O Prophet). Say: "All things are from Allah." But what hath come to these people, that they fail to understand a single fact?

ما أصابك من حسنة فمن الله وما أصابك من سيئة فمن نفسك وأرسلناك للناس رسولا وكفى بالله شهيدا
Whatever good, (O man!) happens to thee, is from Allah; but whatever evil happens to thee, is from thy (own) soul. and We have sent thee as a messenger to (instruct) mankind. And enough is Allah for a witness.

من يطع الرسول فقد أطاع الله ومن تولى فما أرسلناك عليهم حفيظا
He who obeys the Messenger, obeys Allah: But if any turn away, We have not sent thee to watch over their (evil deeds).

ويقولون طاعة فإذا برزوا من عندك بيت طائفة منهم غير الذي تقول والله يكتب ما يبيتون فأعرض عنهم وتوكل على الله وكفى بالله وكيلا
They have "Obedience" on their lips; but when they leave thee, a section of them Meditate all night on things very different from what thou tellest them. But Allah records their nightly (plots): So keep clear of them, and put thy trust in Allah, and enough is Allah as a disposer of affairs.

أفلا يتدبرون القرآن ولو كان من عند غير الله لوجدوا فيه اختلافا كثيرا
Do they not consider the Qur'an (with care)? Had it been from other Than Allah, they would surely have found therein Much discrepancy.

وإذا جاءهم أمر من الأمن أو الخوف أذاعوا به ولو ردوه إلى الرسول وإلى أولي الأمر منهم لعلمه الذين يستنبطونه منهم ولولا فضل الله عليكم ورحمته لاتبعتم الشيطان إلا قليلا
When there comes to them some matter touching (Public) safety or fear, they divulge it. If they had only referred it to the Messenger, or to those charged with authority among them, the proper investigators would have Tested it from them (direct). Were it not for the Grace and Mercy of Allah unto you, all but a few of you would have fallen into the clutches of Satan.

فقاتل في سبيل الله لا تكلف إلا نفسك وحرض المؤمنين عسى الله أن يكف بأس الذين كفروا والله أشد بأسا وأشد تنكيلا
Then fight in Allah's cause - Thou art held responsible only for thyself - and rouse the believers. It may be that Allah will restrain the fury of the Unbelievers; for Allah is the strongest in might and in punishment.

من يشفع شفاعة حسنة يكن له نصيب منها ومن يشفع شفاعة سيئة يكن له كفل منها وكان الله على كل شيء مقيتا
Whoever recommends and helps a good cause becomes a partner therein: And whoever recommends and helps an evil cause, shares in its burden: And Allah hath power over all things.

وإذا حييتم بتحية فحيوا بأحسن منها أو ردوها إن الله كان على كل شيء حسيبا
When a (courteous) greeting is offered you, meet it with a greeting still more courteous, or (at least) of equal courtesy. Allah takes careful account of all things.

الله لا إله إلا هو ليجمعنكم إلى يوم القيامة لا ريب فيه ومن أصدق من الله حديثا
Allah! There is no god but He: of a surety He will gather you together against the Day of Judgment, about which there is no doubt. And whose word can be truer than Allah's?

فما لكم في المنافقين فئتين والله أركسهم بما كسبوا أتريدون أن تهدوا من أضل الله ومن يضلل الله فلن تجد له سبيلا
Why should ye be divided into two parties about the Hypocrites? Allah hath upset them for their (evil) deeds. Would ye guide those whom Allah hath thrown out of the Way? For those whom Allah hath thrown out of the Way, never shalt thou find the Way.

ودوا لو تكفرون كما كفروا فتكونون سواء فلا تتخذوا منهم أولياء حتى يهاجروا في سبيل الله فإن تولوا فخذوهم واقتلوهم حيث وجدتموهم ولا تتخذوا منهم وليا ولا نصيرا
They but wish that ye should reject Faith, as they do, and thus be on the same footing (as they): But take not friends from their ranks until they flee in the way of Allah (From what is forbidden). But if they turn renegades, seize them and slay them wherever ye find them; and (in any case) take no friends or helpers from their ranks;-

إلا الذين يصلون إلى قوم بينكم وبينهم ميثاق أو جاءوكم حصرت صدورهم أن يقاتلوكم أو يقاتلوا قومهم ولو شاء الله لسلطهم عليكم فلقاتلوكم فإن اعتزلوكم فلم يقاتلوكم وألقوا إليكم السلم فما جعل الله لكم عليهم سبيلا
Except those who join a group between whom and you there is a treaty (of peace), or those who approach you with hearts restraining them from fighting you as well as fighting their own people. If Allah had pleased, He could have given them power over you, and they would have fought you: Therefore if they withdraw from you but fight you not, and (instead) send you (Guarantees of) peace, then Allah Hath opened no way for you (to war against them).

ستجدون آخرين يريدون أن يأمنوكم ويأمنوا قومهم كل ما ردوا إلى الفتنة أركسوا فيها فإن لم يعتزلوكم ويلقوا إليكم السلم ويكفوا أيديهم فخذوهم واقتلوهم حيث ثقفتموهم وأولئكم جعلنا لكم عليهم سلطانا مبينا
Others you will find that wish to gain your confidence as well as that of their people: Every time they are sent back to temptation, they succumb thereto: if they withdraw not from you nor give you (guarantees) of peace besides restraining their hands, seize them and slay them wherever ye get them: In their case We have provided you with a clear argument against them.

وما كان لمؤمن أن يقتل مؤمنا إلا خطأ ومن قتل مؤمنا خطأ فتحرير رقبة مؤمنة ودية مسلمة إلى أهله إلا أن يصدقوا فإن كان من قوم عدو لكم وهو مؤمن فتحرير رقبة مؤمنة وإن كان من قوم بينكم وبينهم ميثاق فدية مسلمة إلى أهله وتحرير رقبة مؤمنة فمن لم يجد فصيام شهرين متتابعين توبة من الله وكان الله عليما حكيما
Never should a believer kill a believer; but (If it so happens) by mistake, (Compensation is due): If one (so) kills a believer, it is ordained that he should free a believing slave, and pay compensation to the deceased's family, unless they remit it freely. If the deceased belonged to a people at war with you, and he was a believer, the freeing of a believing slave (Is enough). If he belonged to a people with whom ye have treaty of Mutual alliance, compensation should be paid to his family, and a believing slave be freed. For those who find this beyond their means, (is prescribed) a fast for two months running: by way of repentance to Allah: for Allah hath all knowledge and all wisdom.

ومن يقتل مؤمنا متعمدا فجزاؤه جهنم خالدا فيها وغضب الله عليه ولعنه وأعد له عذابا عظيما
If a man kills a believer intentionally, his recompense is Hell, to abide therein (For ever): And the wrath and the curse of Allah are upon him, and a dreadful penalty is prepared for him.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إذا ضربتم في سبيل الله فتبينوا ولا تقولوا لمن ألقى إليكم السلام لست مؤمنا تبتغون عرض الحياة الدنيا فعند الله مغانم كثيرة كذلك كنتم من قبل فمن الله عليكم فتبينوا إن الله كان بما تعملون خبيرا
O ye who believe! When ye go abroad in the cause of Allah, investigate carefully, and say not to any one who offers you a salutation: "Thou art none of a believer!" Coveting the perishable goods of this life: with Allah are profits and spoils abundant. Even thus were ye yourselves before, till Allah conferred on you His favours: Therefore carefully investigate. For Allah is well aware of all that ye do.

لا يستوي القاعدون من المؤمنين غير أولي الضرر والمجاهدون في سبيل الله بأموالهم وأنفسهم فضل الله المجاهدين بأموالهم وأنفسهم على القاعدين درجة وكلا وعد الله الحسنى وفضل الله المجاهدين على القاعدين أجرا عظيما
Not equal are those believers who sit (at home) and receive no hurt, and those who strive and fight in the cause of Allah with their goods and their persons. Allah hath granted a grade higher to those who strive and fight with their goods and persons than to those who sit (at home). Unto all (in Faith) Hath Allah promised good: But those who strive and fight Hath He distinguished above those who sit (at home) by a special reward,-

درجات منه ومغفرة ورحمة وكان الله غفورا رحيما
Ranks specially bestowed by Him, and Forgiveness and Mercy. For Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

إن الذين توفاهم الملائكة ظالمي أنفسهم قالوا فيم كنتم قالوا كنا مستضعفين في الأرض قالوا ألم تكن أرض الله واسعة فتهاجروا فيها فأولئك مأواهم جهنم وساءت مصيرا
When angels take the souls of those who die in sin against their souls, they say: "In what (plight) Were ye?" They reply: "Weak and oppressed Were we in the earth." They say: "Was not the earth of Allah spacious enough for you to move yourselves away (From evil)?" Such men will find their abode in Hell,- What an evil refuge! -

إلا المستضعفين من الرجال والنساء والولدان لا يستطيعون حيلة ولا يهتدون سبيلا
Except those who are (really) weak and oppressed - men, women, and children - who have no means in their power, nor (a guide-post) to their way.

فأولئك عسى الله أن يعفو عنهم وكان الله عفوا غفورا
For these, there is hope that Allah will forgive: For Allah doth blot out (sins) and forgive again and again.

ومن يهاجر في سبيل الله يجد في الأرض مراغما كثيرا وسعة ومن يخرج من بيته مهاجرا إلى الله ورسوله ثم يدركه الموت فقد وقع أجره على الله وكان الله غفورا رحيما
He who forsakes his home in the cause of Allah, finds in the earth Many a refuge, wide and spacious: Should he die as a refugee from home for Allah and His Messenger, His reward becomes due and sure with Allah: And Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

وإذا ضربتم في الأرض فليس عليكم جناح أن تقصروا من الصلاة إن خفتم أن يفتنكم الذين كفروا إن الكافرين كانوا لكم عدوا مبينا
When ye travel through the earth, there is no blame on you if ye shorten your prayers, for fear the Unbelievers May attack you: For the Unbelievers are unto you open enemies.

وإذا كنت فيهم فأقمت لهم الصلاة فلتقم طائفة منهم معك وليأخذوا أسلحتهم فإذا سجدوا فليكونوا من ورائكم ولتأت طائفة أخرى لم يصلوا فليصلوا معك وليأخذوا حذرهم وأسلحتهم ود الذين كفروا لو تغفلون عن أسلحتكم وأمتعتكم فيميلون عليكم ميلة واحدة ولا جناح عليكم إن كان بكم أذى من مطر أو كنتم مرضى أن تضعوا أسلحتكم وخذوا حذركم إن الله أعد للكافرين عذابا مهينا
When thou (O Messenger) art with them, and standest to lead them in prayer, Let one party of them stand up (in prayer) with thee, Taking their arms with them: When they finish their prostrations, let them Take their position in the rear. And let the other party come up which hath not yet prayed - and let them pray with thee, Taking all precaution, and bearing arms: the Unbelievers wish, if ye were negligent of your arms and your baggage, to assault you in a single rush. But there is no blame on you if ye put away your arms because of the inconvenience of rain or because ye are ill; but take (every) precaution for yourselves. For the Unbelievers Allah hath prepared a humiliating punishment.

فإذا قضيتم الصلاة فاذكروا الله قياما وقعودا وعلى جنوبكم فإذا اطمأننتم فأقيموا الصلاة إن الصلاة كانت على المؤمنين كتابا موقوتا
When ye pass (Congregational) prayers, celebrate Allah's praises, standing, sitting down, or lying down on your sides; but when ye are free from danger, set up Regular Prayers: For such prayers are enjoined on believers at stated times.

ولا تهنوا في ابتغاء القوم إن تكونوا تألمون فإنهم يألمون كما تألمون وترجون من الله ما لا يرجون وكان الله عليما حكيما
And slacken not in following up the enemy: If ye are suffering hardships, they are suffering similar hardships; but ye have Hope from Allah, while they have none. And Allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.

إنا أنزلنا إليك الكتاب بالحق لتحكم بين الناس بما أراك الله ولا تكن للخائنين خصيما
We have sent down to thee the Book in truth, that thou mightest judge between men, as guided by Allah: so be not (used) as an advocate by those who betray their trust;

واستغفر الله إن الله كان غفورا رحيما
But seek the forgiveness of Allah; for Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

ولا تجادل عن الذين يختانون أنفسهم إن الله لا يحب من كان خوانا أثيما
Contend not on behalf of such as betray their own souls; for Allah loveth not one given to perfidy and crime:

يستخفون من الناس ولا يستخفون من الله وهو معهم إذ يبيتون ما لا يرضى من القول وكان الله بما يعملون محيطا
They may hide (Their crimes) from men, but they cannot hide (Them) from Allah, seeing that He is in their midst when they plot by night, in words that He cannot approve: And Allah Doth compass round all that they do.

ها أنتم هؤلاء جادلتم عنهم في الحياة الدنيا فمن يجادل الله عنهم يوم القيامة أم من يكون عليهم وكيلا
Ah! These are the sort of men on whose behalf ye may contend in this world; but who will contend with Allah on their behalf on the Day of Judgment, or who will carry their affairs through?

ومن يعمل سوءا أو يظلم نفسه ثم يستغفر الله يجد الله غفورا رحيما
If any one does evil or wrongs his own soul but afterwards seeks Allah's forgiveness, he will find Allah Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

ومن يكسب إثما فإنما يكسبه على نفسه وكان الله عليما حكيما
And if any one earns sin. he earns it against His own soul: for Allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.

ومن يكسب خطيئة أو إثما ثم يرم به بريئا فقد احتمل بهتانا وإثما مبينا
But if any one earns a fault or a sin and throws it on to one that is innocent, He carries (on himself) (Both) a falsehood and a flagrant sin.

ولولا فضل الله عليك ورحمته لهمت طائفة منهم أن يضلوك وما يضلون إلا أنفسهم وما يضرونك من شيء وأنزل الله عليك الكتاب والحكمة وعلمك ما لم تكن تعلم وكان فضل الله عليك عظيما
But for the Grace of Allah to thee and his Mercy, a party of them would certainly have plotted to lead thee astray. But (in fact) they will only Lead their own souls astray, and to thee they can do no harm in the least. For Allah hath sent down to thee the Book and wisdom and taught thee what thou Knewest not (before): And great is the Grace of Allah unto thee.

لا خير في كثير من نجواهم إلا من أمر بصدقة أو معروف أو إصلاح بين الناس ومن يفعل ذلك ابتغاء مرضات الله فسوف نؤتيه أجرا عظيما
In most of their secret talks there is no good: But if one exhorts to a deed of charity or justice or conciliation between men, (Secrecy is permissible): To him who does this, seeking the good pleasure of Allah, We shall soon give a reward of the highest (value).

ومن يشاقق الرسول من بعد ما تبين له الهدى ويتبع غير سبيل المؤمنين نوله ما تولى ونصله جهنم وساءت مصيرا
If anyone contends with the Messenger even after guidance has been plainly conveyed to him, and follows a path other than that becoming to men of Faith, We shall leave him in the path he has chosen, and land him in Hell,- what an evil refuge!

إن الله لا يغفر أن يشرك به ويغفر ما دون ذلك لمن يشاء ومن يشرك بالله فقد ضل ضلالا بعيدا
Allah forgiveth not (The sin of) joining other gods with Him; but He forgiveth whom He pleaseth other sins than this: one who joins other gods with Allah, Hath strayed far, far away (from the right).

إن يدعون من دونه إلا إناثا وإن يدعون إلا شيطانا مريدا
(The Pagans), leaving Him, call but upon female deities: They call but upon satan the persistent rebel!

لعنه الله وقال لأتخذن من عبادك نصيبا مفروضا
Allah did curse him, but he said: "I will take of Thy servants a portion Marked off;

ولأضلنهم ولأمنينهم ولآمرنهم فليبتكن آذان الأنعام ولآمرنهم فليغيرن خلق الله ومن يتخذ الشيطان وليا من دون الله فقد خسر خسرانا مبينا
"I will mislead them, and I will create in them false desires; I will order them to slit the ears of cattle, and to deface the (fair) nature created by Allah." Whoever, forsaking Allah, takes satan for a friend, hath of a surety suffered a loss that is manifest.

يعدهم ويمنيهم وما يعدهم الشيطان إلا غرورا
Satan makes them promises, and creates in them false desires; but satan's promises are nothing but deception.

أولئك مأواهم جهنم ولا يجدون عنها محيصا
They (his dupes) will have their dwelling in Hell, and from it they will find no way of escape.

والذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات سندخلهم جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها أبدا وعد الله حقا ومن أصدق من الله قيلا
But those who believe and do deeds of righteousness,- we shall soon admit them to gardens, with rivers flowing beneath,-to dwell therein for ever. Allah's promise is the truth, and whose word can be truer than Allah's?

ليس بأمانيكم ولا أماني أهل الكتاب من يعمل سوءا يجز به ولا يجد له من دون الله وليا ولا نصيرا
Not your desires, nor those of the People of the Book (can prevail): whoever works evil, will be requited accordingly. Nor will he find, besides Allah, any protector or helper.

ومن يعمل من الصالحات من ذكر أو أنثى وهو مؤمن فأولئك يدخلون الجنة ولا يظلمون نقيرا
If any do deeds of righteousness,- be they male or female - and have faith, they will enter Heaven, and not the least injustice will be done to them.

ومن أحسن دينا ممن أسلم وجهه لله وهو محسن واتبع ملة إبراهيم حنيفا واتخذ الله إبراهيم خليلا
Who can be better in religion than one who submits his whole self to Allah, does good, and follows the way of Abraham the true in Faith? For Allah did take Abraham for a friend.

ولله ما في السماوات وما في الأرض وكان الله بكل شيء محيطا
But to Allah belong all things in the heavens and on earth: And He it is that Encompasseth all things.

ويستفتونك في النساء قل الله يفتيكم فيهن وما يتلى عليكم في الكتاب في يتامى النساء اللاتي لا تؤتونهن ما كتب لهن وترغبون أن تنكحوهن والمستضعفين من الولدان وأن تقوموا لليتامى بالقسط وما تفعلوا من خير فإن الله كان به عليما
They ask thy instruction concerning the women say: Allah doth instruct you about them: And (remember) what hath been rehearsed unto you in the Book, concerning the orphans of women to whom ye give not the portions prescribed, and yet whom ye desire to marry, as also concerning the children who are weak and oppressed: that ye stand firm for justice to orphans. There is not a good deed which ye do, but Allah is well-acquainted therewith.

وإن امرأة خافت من بعلها نشوزا أو إعراضا فلا جناح عليهما أن يصلحا بينهما صلحا والصلح خير وأحضرت الأنفس الشح وإن تحسنوا وتتقوا فإن الله كان بما تعملون خبيرا
If a wife fears cruelty or desertion on her husband's part, there is no blame on them if they arrange an amicable settlement between themselves; and such settlement is best; even though men's souls are swayed by greed. But if ye do good and practise self-restraint, Allah is well-acquainted with all that ye do.

ولن تستطيعوا أن تعدلوا بين النساء ولو حرصتم فلا تميلوا كل الميل فتذروها كالمعلقة وإن تصلحوا وتتقوا فإن الله كان غفورا رحيما
Ye are never able to be fair and just as between women, even if it is your ardent desire: But turn not away (from a woman) altogether, so as to leave her (as it were) hanging (in the air). If ye come to a friendly understanding, and practise self-restraint, Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

وإن يتفرقا يغن الله كلا من سعته وكان الله واسعا حكيما
But if they disagree (and must part), Allah will provide abundance for all from His all-reaching bounty: for Allah is He that careth for all and is Wise.

ولله ما في السماوات وما في الأرض ولقد وصينا الذين أوتوا الكتاب من قبلكم وإياكم أن اتقوا الله وإن تكفروا فإن لله ما في السماوات وما في الأرض وكان الله غنيا حميدا
To Allah belong all things in the heavens and on earth. Verily we have directed the People of the Book before you, and you (o Muslims) to fear Allah. But if ye deny Him, lo! unto Allah belong all things in the heavens and on earth, and Allah is free of all wants, worthy of all praise.

ولله ما في السماوات وما في الأرض وكفى بالله وكيلا
Yea, unto Allah belong all things in the heavens and on earth, and enough is Allah to carry through all affairs.

إن يشأ يذهبكم أيها الناس ويأت بآخرين وكان الله على ذلك قديرا
If it were His will, He could destroy you, o mankind, and create another race; for He hath power this to do.

من كان يريد ثواب الدنيا فعند الله ثواب الدنيا والآخرة وكان الله سميعا بصيرا
If any one desires a reward in this life, in Allah's (gift) is the reward (both) of this life and of the hereafter: for Allah is He that heareth and seeth (all things).

يا أيها الذين آمنوا كونوا قوامين بالقسط شهداء لله ولو على أنفسكم أو الوالدين والأقربين إن يكن غنيا أو فقيرا فالله أولى بهما فلا تتبعوا الهوى أن تعدلوا وإن تلووا أو تعرضوا فإن الله كان بما تعملون خبيرا
O ye who believe! stand out firmly for justice, as witnesses to Allah, even as against yourselves, or your parents, or your kin, and whether it be (against) rich or poor: for Allah can best protect both. Follow not the lusts (of your hearts), lest ye swerve, and if ye distort (justice) or decline to do justice, verily Allah is well-acquainted with all that ye do.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا آمنوا بالله ورسوله والكتاب الذي نزل على رسوله والكتاب الذي أنزل من قبل ومن يكفر بالله وملائكته وكتبه ورسله واليوم الآخر فقد ضل ضلالا بعيدا
O ye who believe! Believe in Allah and His Messenger, and the scripture which He hath sent to His Messenger and the scripture which He sent to those before (him). Any who denieth Allah, His angels, His Books, His Messengers, and the Day of Judgment, hath gone far, far astray.

إن الذين آمنوا ثم كفروا ثم آمنوا ثم كفروا ثم ازدادوا كفرا لم يكن الله ليغفر لهم ولا ليهديهم سبيلا
Those who believe, then reject faith, then believe (again) and (again) reject faith, and go on increasing in unbelief,- Allah will not forgive them nor guide them nor guide them on the way.

بشر المنافقين بأن لهم عذابا أليما
To the Hypocrites give the glad tidings that there is for them (but) a grievous penalty;-

الذين يتخذون الكافرين أولياء من دون المؤمنين أيبتغون عندهم العزة فإن العزة لله جميعا
Yea, to those who take for friends unbelievers rather than believers: is it honour they seek among them? Nay,- all honour is with Allah.

وقد نزل عليكم في الكتاب أن إذا سمعتم آيات الله يكفر بها ويستهزأ بها فلا تقعدوا معهم حتى يخوضوا في حديث غيره إنكم إذا مثلهم إن الله جامع المنافقين والكافرين في جهنم جميعا
Already has He sent you Word in the Book, that when ye hear the signs of Allah held in defiance and ridicule, ye are not to sit with them unless they turn to a different theme: if ye did, ye would be like them. For Allah will collect the hypocrites and those who defy faith - all in Hell:-

الذين يتربصون بكم فإن كان لكم فتح من الله قالوا ألم نكن معكم وإن كان للكافرين نصيب قالوا ألم نستحوذ عليكم ونمنعكم من المؤمنين فالله يحكم بينكم يوم القيامة ولن يجعل الله للكافرين على المؤمنين سبيلا
(These are) the ones who wait and watch about you: if ye do gain a victory from Allah, they say: "Were we not with you?"- but if the unbelievers gain a success, they say (to them): "Did we not gain an advantage over you, and did we not guard you from the believers?" but Allah will judge betwixt you on the Day of Judgment. And never will Allah grant to the unbelievers a way (to triumphs) over the believers.

إن المنافقين يخادعون الله وهو خادعهم وإذا قاموا إلى الصلاة قاموا كسالى يراءون الناس ولا يذكرون الله إلا قليلا
The Hypocrites - they think they are over-reaching Allah, but He will over-reach them: When they stand up to prayer, they stand without earnestness, to be seen of men, but little do they hold Allah in remembrance;

مذبذبين بين ذلك لا إلى هؤلاء ولا إلى هؤلاء ومن يضلل الله فلن تجد له سبيلا
(They are) distracted in mind even in the midst of it,- being (sincerely) for neither one group nor for another whom Allah leaves straying,- never wilt thou find for him the way.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تتخذوا الكافرين أولياء من دون المؤمنين أتريدون أن تجعلوا لله عليكم سلطانا مبينا
O ye who believe! Take not for friends unbelievers rather than believers: Do ye wish to offer Allah an open proof against yourselves?

إن المنافقين في الدرك الأسفل من النار ولن تجد لهم نصيرا
The Hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the Fire: no helper wilt thou find for them;-

إلا الذين تابوا وأصلحوا واعتصموا بالله وأخلصوا دينهم لله فأولئك مع المؤمنين وسوف يؤت الله المؤمنين أجرا عظيما
Except for those who repent, mend (their lives) hold fast to Allah, and purify their religion as in Allah's sight: if so they will be (numbered) with the believers. And soon will Allah grant to the believers a reward of immense value.

ما يفعل الله بعذابكم إن شكرتم وآمنتم وكان الله شاكرا عليما
What can Allah gain by your punishment, if ye are grateful and ye believe? Nay, it is Allah that recogniseth (all good), and knoweth all things.

لا يحب الله الجهر بالسوء من القول إلا من ظلم وكان الله سميعا عليما
Allah loveth not that evil should be noised abroad in public speech, except where injustice hath been done; for Allah is He who heareth and knoweth all things.

إن تبدوا خيرا أو تخفوه أو تعفوا عن سوء فإن الله كان عفوا قديرا
Whether ye publish a good deed or conceal it or cover evil with pardon, verily Allah doth blot out (sins) and hath power (in the judgment of values).

إن الذين يكفرون بالله ورسله ويريدون أن يفرقوا بين الله ورسله ويقولون نؤمن ببعض ونكفر ببعض ويريدون أن يتخذوا بين ذلك سبيلا
Those who deny Allah and His messengers, and (those who) wish to separate Allah from His messengers, saying: "We believe in some but reject others": And (those who) wish to take a course midway,-

أولئك هم الكافرون حقا وأعتدنا للكافرين عذابا مهينا
They are in truth (equally) unbelievers; and we have prepared for unbelievers a humiliating punishment.

والذين آمنوا بالله ورسله ولم يفرقوا بين أحد منهم أولئك سوف يؤتيهم أجورهم وكان الله غفورا رحيما
To those who believe in Allah and His messengers and make no distinction between any of the messengers, we shall soon give their (due) rewards: for Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

يسألك أهل الكتاب أن تنزل عليهم كتابا من السماء فقد سألوا موسى أكبر من ذلك فقالوا أرنا الله جهرة فأخذتهم الصاعقة بظلمهم ثم اتخذوا العجل من بعد ما جاءتهم البينات فعفونا عن ذلك وآتينا موسى سلطانا مبينا
The people of the Book ask thee to cause a book to descend to them from heaven: Indeed they asked Moses for an even greater (miracle), for they said: "Show us Allah in public," but they were dazed for their presumption, with thunder and lightning. Yet they worshipped the calf even after clear signs had come to them; even so we forgave them; and gave Moses manifest proofs of authority.

ورفعنا فوقهم الطور بميثاقهم وقلنا لهم ادخلوا الباب سجدا وقلنا لهم لا تعدوا في السبت وأخذنا منهم ميثاقا غليظا
And for their covenant we raised over them (the towering height) of Mount (Sinai); and (on another occasion) we said: "Enter the gate with humility"; and (once again) we commanded them: "Transgress not in the matter of the sabbath." And we took from them a solemn covenant.

فبما نقضهم ميثاقهم وكفرهم بآيات الله وقتلهم الأنبياء بغير حق وقولهم قلوبنا غلف بل طبع الله عليها بكفرهم فلا يؤمنون إلا قليلا
(They have incurred divine displeasure): In that they broke their covenant; that they rejected the signs of Allah; that they slew the Messengers in defiance of right; that they said, "Our hearts are the wrappings (which preserve Allah's Word; We need no more)";- Nay, Allah hath set the seal on their hearts for their blasphemy, and little is it they believe;-

وبكفرهم وقولهم على مريم بهتانا عظيما
That they rejected Faith; that they uttered against Mary a grave false charge;

وقولهم إنا قتلنا المسيح عيسى ابن مريم رسول الله وما قتلوه وما صلبوه ولكن شبه لهم وإن الذين اختلفوا فيه لفي شك منه ما لهم به من علم إلا اتباع الظن وما قتلوه يقينا
That they said (in boast), "We killed Christ Jesus the son of Mary, the Messenger of Allah";- but they killed him not, nor crucified him, but so it was made to appear to them, and those who differ therein are full of doubts, with no (certain) knowledge, but only conjecture to follow, for of a surety they killed him not:-

بل رفعه الله إليه وكان الله عزيزا حكيما
Nay, Allah raised him up unto Himself; and Allah is Exalted in Power, Wise;-

وإن من أهل الكتاب إلا ليؤمنن به قبل موته ويوم القيامة يكون عليهم شهيدا
And there is none of the People of the Book but must believe in him before his death; and on the Day of Judgment he will be a witness against them;-

فبظلم من الذين هادوا حرمنا عليهم طيبات أحلت لهم وبصدهم عن سبيل الله كثيرا
For the iniquity of the Jews We made unlawful for them certain (foods) good and wholesome which had been lawful for them;- in that they hindered many from Allah's Way;-

وأخذهم الربا وقد نهوا عنه وأكلهم أموال الناس بالباطل وأعتدنا للكافرين منهم عذابا أليما
That they took usury, though they were forbidden; and that they devoured men's substance wrongfully;- we have prepared for those among them who reject faith a grievous punishment.

لكن الراسخون في العلم منهم والمؤمنون يؤمنون بما أنزل إليك وما أنزل من قبلك والمقيمين الصلاة والمؤتون الزكاة والمؤمنون بالله واليوم الآخر أولئك سنؤتيهم أجرا عظيما
But those among them who are well-grounded in knowledge, and the believers, believe in what hath been revealed to thee and what was revealed before thee: And (especially) those who establish regular prayer and practise regular charity and believe in Allah and in the Last Day: To them shall We soon give a great reward.

إنا أوحينا إليك كما أوحينا إلى نوح والنبيين من بعده وأوحينا إلى إبراهيم وإسماعيل وإسحاق ويعقوب والأسباط وعيسى وأيوب ويونس وهارون وسليمان وآتينا داوود زبورا
We have sent thee inspiration, as We sent it to Noah and the Messengers after him: we sent inspiration to Abraham, Isma'il, Isaac, Jacob and the Tribes, to Jesus, Job, Jonah, Aaron, and solomon, and to David We gave the Psalms.

ورسلا قد قصصناهم عليك من قبل ورسلا لم نقصصهم عليك وكلم الله موسى تكليما
Of some messengers We have already told thee the story; of others We have not;- and to Moses Allah spoke direct;-

رسلا مبشرين ومنذرين لئلا يكون للناس على الله حجة بعد الرسل وكان الله عزيزا حكيما
Messengers who gave good news as well as warning, that mankind, after (the coming) of the messengers, should have no plea against Allah: For Allah is Exalted in Power, Wise.

لكن الله يشهد بما أنزل إليك أنزله بعلمه والملائكة يشهدون وكفى بالله شهيدا
But Allah beareth witness that what He hath sent unto thee He hath sent from His (own) knowledge, and the angels bear witness: But enough is Allah for a witness.

إن الذين كفروا وصدوا عن سبيل الله قد ضلوا ضلالا بعيدا
Those who reject Faith and keep off (men) from the way of Allah, have verily strayed far, far away from the Path.

إن الذين كفروا وظلموا لم يكن الله ليغفر لهم ولا ليهديهم طريقا
Those who reject Faith and do wrong,- Allah will not forgive them nor guide them to any way-

إلا طريق جهنم خالدين فيها أبدا وكان ذلك على الله يسيرا
Except the way of Hell, to dwell therein for ever. And this to Allah is easy.

يا أيها الناس قد جاءكم الرسول بالحق من ربكم فآمنوا خيرا لكم وإن تكفروا فإن لله ما في السماوات والأرض وكان الله عليما حكيما
O Mankind! The Messenger hath come to you in truth from Allah: believe in him: It is best for you. But if ye reject Faith, to Allah belong all things in the heavens and on earth: And Allah is All-knowing, All-wise.

يا أهل الكتاب لا تغلوا في دينكم ولا تقولوا على الله إلا الحق إنما المسيح عيسى ابن مريم رسول الله وكلمته ألقاها إلى مريم وروح منه فآمنوا بالله ورسله ولا تقولوا ثلاثة انتهوا خيرا لكم إنما الله إله واحد سبحانه أن يكون له ولد له ما في السماوات وما في الأرض وكفى بالله وكيلا
O People of the Book! Commit no excesses in your religion: Nor say of Allah aught but the truth. Christ Jesus the son of Mary was (no more than) a messenger of Allah, and His Word, which He bestowed on Mary, and a spirit proceeding from Him: so believe in Allah and His messengers. Say not "Trinity": desist: it will be better for you: for Allah is one Allah: Glory be to Him: (far exalted is He) above having a son. To Him belong all things in the heavens and on earth. And enough is Allah as a Disposer of affairs.

لن يستنكف المسيح أن يكون عبدا لله ولا الملائكة المقربون ومن يستنكف عن عبادته ويستكبر فسيحشرهم إليه جميعا
Christ disdaineth nor to serve and worship Allah, nor do the angels, those nearest (to Allah): those who disdain His worship and are arrogant,-He will gather them all together unto Himself to (answer).

فأما الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات فيوفيهم أجورهم ويزيدهم من فضله وأما الذين استنكفوا واستكبروا فيعذبهم عذابا أليما ولا يجدون لهم من دون الله وليا ولا نصيرا
But to those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, He will give their (due) rewards,- and more, out of His bounty: But those who are disdainful and arrogant, He will punish with a grievous penalty; Nor will they find, besides Allah, any to protect or help them.

يا أيها الناس قد جاءكم برهان من ربكم وأنزلنا إليكم نورا مبينا
O mankind! verily there hath come to you a convincing proof from your Lord: For We have sent unto you a light (that is) manifest.

فأما الذين آمنوا بالله واعتصموا به فسيدخلهم في رحمة منه وفضل ويهديهم إليه صراطا مستقيما
Then those who believe in Allah, and hold fast to Him,- soon will He admit them to mercy and grace from Himself, and guide them to Himself by a straight way.

يستفتونك قل الله يفتيكم في الكلالة إن امرؤ هلك ليس له ولد وله أخت فلها نصف ما ترك وهو يرثها إن لم يكن لها ولد فإن كانتا اثنتين فلهما الثلثان مما ترك وإن كانوا إخوة رجالا ونساء فللذكر مثل حظ الأنثيين يبين الله لكم أن تضلوا والله بكل شيء عليم
They ask thee for a legal decision. Say: Allah directs (thus) about those who leave no descendants or ascendants as heirs. If it is a man that dies, leaving a sister but no child, she shall have half the inheritance: If (such a deceased was) a woman, who left no child, Her brother takes her inheritance: If there are two sisters, they shall have two-thirds of the inheritance (between them): if there are brothers and sisters, (they share), the male having twice the share of the female. Thus doth Allah make clear to you (His law), lest ye err. And Allah hath knowledge of all things.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم يا أيها الذين آمنوا أوفوا بالعقود أحلت لكم بهيمة الأنعام إلا ما يتلى عليكم غير محلي الصيد وأنتم حرم إن الله يحكم ما يريد
O ye who believe! fulfil (all) obligations. Lawful unto you (for food) are all four-footed animals, with the exceptions named: But animals of the chase are forbidden while ye are in the sacred precincts or in pilgrim garb: for Allah doth command according to His will and plan.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تحلوا شعائر الله ولا الشهر الحرام ولا الهدي ولا القلائد ولا آمين البيت الحرام يبتغون فضلا من ربهم ورضوانا وإذا حللتم فاصطادوا ولا يجرمنكم شنآن قوم أن صدوكم عن المسجد الحرام أن تعتدوا وتعاونوا على البر والتقوى ولا تعاونوا على الإثم والعدوان واتقوا الله إن الله شديد العقاب
O ye who believe! Violate not the sanctity of the symbols of Allah, nor of the sacred month, nor of the animals brought for sacrifice, nor the garlands that mark out such animals, nor the people resorting to the sacred house, seeking of the bounty and good pleasure of their Lord. But when ye are clear of the sacred precincts and of pilgrim garb, ye may hunt and let not the hatred of some people in (once) shutting you out of the Sacred Mosque lead you to transgression (and hostility on your part). Help ye one another in righteousness and piety, but help ye not one another in sin and rancour: fear Allah: for Allah is strict in punishment.

حرمت عليكم الميتة والدم ولحم الخنزير وما أهل لغير الله به والمنخنقة والموقوذة والمتردية والنطيحة وما أكل السبع إلا ما ذكيتم وما ذبح على النصب وأن تستقسموا بالأزلام ذلكم فسق اليوم يئس الذين كفروا من دينكم فلا تخشوهم واخشون اليوم أكملت لكم دينكم وأتممت عليكم نعمتي ورضيت لكم الإسلام دينا فمن اضطر في مخمصة غير متجانف لإثم فإن الله غفور رحيم
Forbidden to you (for food) are: dead meat, blood, the flesh of swine, and that on which hath been invoked the name of other than Allah; that which hath been killed by strangling, or by a violent blow, or by a headlong fall, or by being gored to death; that which hath been (partly) eaten by a wild animal; unless ye are able to slaughter it (in due form); that which is sacrificed on stone (altars); (forbidden) also is the division (of meat) by raffling with arrows: that is impiety. This day have those who reject faith given up all hope of your religion: yet fear them not but fear Me. This day have I perfected your religion for you, completed My favour upon you, and have chosen for you Islam as your religion. But if any is forced by hunger, with no inclination to transgression, Allah is indeed Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

يسألونك ماذا أحل لهم قل أحل لكم الطيبات وما علمتم من الجوارح مكلبين تعلمونهن مما علمكم الله فكلوا مما أمسكن عليكم واذكروا اسم الله عليه واتقوا الله إن الله سريع الحساب
They ask thee what is lawful to them (as food). Say: lawful unto you are (all) things good and pure: and what ye have taught your trained hunting animals (to catch) in the manner directed to you by Allah: eat what they catch for you, but pronounce the name of Allah over it: and fear Allah; for Allah is swift in taking account.

اليوم أحل لكم الطيبات وطعام الذين أوتوا الكتاب حل لكم وطعامكم حل لهم والمحصنات من المؤمنات والمحصنات من الذين أوتوا الكتاب من قبلكم إذا آتيتموهن أجورهن محصنين غير مسافحين ولا متخذي أخدان ومن يكفر بالإيمان فقد حبط عمله وهو في الآخرة من الخاسرين
This day are (all) things good and pure made lawful unto you. The food of the People of the Book is lawful unto you and yours is lawful unto them. (Lawful unto you in marriage) are (not only) chaste women who are believers, but chaste women among the People of the Book, revealed before your time,- when ye give them their due dowers, and desire chastity, not lewdness, nor secret intrigues if any one rejects faith, fruitless is his work, and in the Hereafter he will be in the ranks of those who have lost (all spiritual good).

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إذا قمتم إلى الصلاة فاغسلوا وجوهكم وأيديكم إلى المرافق وامسحوا برءوسكم وأرجلكم إلى الكعبين وإن كنتم جنبا فاطهروا وإن كنتم مرضى أو على سفر أو جاء أحد منكم من الغائط أو لامستم النساء فلم تجدوا ماء فتيمموا صعيدا طيبا فامسحوا بوجوهكم وأيديكم منه ما يريد الله ليجعل عليكم من حرج ولكن يريد ليطهركم وليتم نعمته عليكم لعلكم تشكرون
O ye who believe! when ye prepare for prayer, wash your faces, and your hands (and arms) to the elbows; Rub your heads (with water); and (wash) your feet to the ankles. If ye are in a state of ceremonial impurity, bathe your whole body. But if ye are ill, or on a journey, or one of you cometh from offices of nature, or ye have been in contact with women, and ye find no water, then take for yourselves clean sand or earth, and rub therewith your faces and hands, Allah doth not wish to place you in a difficulty, but to make you clean, and to complete his favour to you, that ye may be grateful.

واذكروا نعمة الله عليكم وميثاقه الذي واثقكم به إذ قلتم سمعنا وأطعنا واتقوا الله إن الله عليم بذات الصدور
And call in remembrance the favour of Allah unto you, and His covenant, which He ratified with you, when ye said: "We hear and we obey": And fear Allah, for Allah knoweth well the secrets of your hearts.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا كونوا قوامين لله شهداء بالقسط ولا يجرمنكم شنآن قوم على ألا تعدلوا اعدلوا هو أقرب للتقوى واتقوا الله إن الله خبير بما تعملون
O ye who believe! stand out firmly for Allah, as witnesses to fair dealing, and let not the hatred of others to you make you swerve to wrong and depart from justice. Be just: that is next to piety: and fear Allah. For Allah is well-acquainted with all that ye do.

وعد الله الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات لهم مغفرة وأجر عظيم
To those who believe and do deeds of righteousness hath Allah promised forgiveness and a great reward.

والذين كفروا وكذبوا بآياتنا أولئك أصحاب الجحيم
Those who reject faith and deny our signs will be companions of Hell-fire.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا اذكروا نعمت الله عليكم إذ هم قوم أن يبسطوا إليكم أيديهم فكف أيديهم عنكم واتقوا الله وعلى الله فليتوكل المؤمنون
O ye who believe! Call in remembrance the favour of Allah unto you when certain men formed the design to stretch out their hands against you, but (Allah) held back their hands from you: so fear Allah. And on Allah let believers put (all) their trust.

ولقد أخذ الله ميثاق بني إسرائيل وبعثنا منهم اثني عشر نقيبا وقال الله إني معكم لئن أقمتم الصلاة وآتيتم الزكاة وآمنتم برسلي وعزرتموهم وأقرضتم الله قرضا حسنا لأكفرن عنكم سيئاتكم ولأدخلنكم جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار فمن كفر بعد ذلك منكم فقد ضل سواء السبيل
Allah did aforetime take a covenant from the Children of Israel, and we appointed twelve captains among them. And Allah said: "I am with you: if ye (but) establish regular prayers, practise regular charity, believe in my messengers, honour and assist them, and loan to Allah a beautiful loan, verily I will wipe out from you your evils, and admit you to gardens with rivers flowing beneath; but if any of you, after this, resisteth faith, he hath truly wandered from the path or rectitude."

فبما نقضهم ميثاقهم لعناهم وجعلنا قلوبهم قاسية يحرفون الكلم عن مواضعه ونسوا حظا مما ذكروا به ولا تزال تطلع على خائنة منهم إلا قليلا منهم فاعف عنهم واصفح إن الله يحب المحسنين
But because of their breach of their covenant, We cursed them, and made their hearts grow hard; they change the words from their (right) places and forget a good part of the message that was sent them, nor wilt thou cease to find them- barring a few - ever bent on (new) deceits: but forgive them, and overlook (their misdeeds): for Allah loveth those who are kind.

ومن الذين قالوا إنا نصارى أخذنا ميثاقهم فنسوا حظا مما ذكروا به فأغرينا بينهم العداوة والبغضاء إلى يوم القيامة وسوف ينبئهم الله بما كانوا يصنعون
From those, too, who call themselves Christians, We did take a covenant, but they forgot a good part of the message that was sent them: so we estranged them, with enmity and hatred between the one and the other, to the day of judgment. And soon will Allah show them what it is they have done.

يا أهل الكتاب قد جاءكم رسولنا يبين لكم كثيرا مما كنتم تخفون من الكتاب ويعفو عن كثير قد جاءكم من الله نور وكتاب مبين
O people of the Book! There hath come to you our Messenger, revealing to you much that ye used to hide in the Book, and passing over much (that is now unnecessary): There hath come to you from Allah a (new) light and a perspicuous Book, -

يهدي به الله من اتبع رضوانه سبل السلام ويخرجهم من الظلمات إلى النور بإذنه ويهديهم إلى صراط مستقيم
Wherewith Allah guideth all who seek His good pleasure to ways of peace and safety, and leadeth them out of darkness, by His will, unto the light,- guideth them to a path that is straight.

لقد كفر الذين قالوا إن الله هو المسيح ابن مريم قل فمن يملك من الله شيئا إن أراد أن يهلك المسيح ابن مريم وأمه ومن في الأرض جميعا ولله ملك السماوات والأرض وما بينهما يخلق ما يشاء والله على كل شيء قدير
In blasphemy indeed are those that say that Allah is Christ the son of Mary. Say: "Who then hath the least power against Allah, if His will were to destroy Christ the son of Mary, his mother, and all every - one that is on the earth? For to Allah belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and all that is between. He createth what He pleaseth. For Allah hath power over all things."

وقالت اليهود والنصارى نحن أبناء الله وأحباؤه قل فلم يعذبكم بذنوبكم بل أنتم بشر ممن خلق يغفر لمن يشاء ويعذب من يشاء ولله ملك السماوات والأرض وما بينهما وإليه المصير
(Both) the Jews and the Christians say: "We are sons of Allah, and his beloved." Say: "Why then doth He punish you for your sins? Nay, ye are but men,- of the men he hath created: He forgiveth whom He pleaseth, and He punisheth whom He pleaseth: and to Allah belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and all that is between: and unto Him is the final goal (of all)"

يا أهل الكتاب قد جاءكم رسولنا يبين لكم على فترة من الرسل أن تقولوا ما جاءنا من بشير ولا نذير فقد جاءكم بشير ونذير والله على كل شيء قدير
O People of the Book! Now hath come unto you, making (things) clear unto you, Our Messenger, after the break in (the series of) our messengers, lest ye should say: "There came unto us no bringer of glad tidings and no warner (from evil)": But now hath come unto you a bringer of glad tidings and a warner (from evil). And Allah hath power over all things.

وإذ قال موسى لقومه يا قوم اذكروا نعمة الله عليكم إذ جعل فيكم أنبياء وجعلكم ملوكا وآتاكم ما لم يؤت أحدا من العالمين
Remember Moses said to his people: "O my people! Call in remembrance the favour of Allah unto you, when He produced prophets among you, made you kings, and gave you what He had not given to any other among the peoples.

يا قوم ادخلوا الأرض المقدسة التي كتب الله لكم ولا ترتدوا على أدباركم فتنقلبوا خاسرين
"O my people! Enter the holy land which Allah hath assigned unto you, and turn not back ignominiously, for then will ye be overthrown, to your own ruin."

قالوا يا موسى إن فيها قوما جبارين وإنا لن ندخلها حتى يخرجوا منها فإن يخرجوا منها فإنا داخلون
They said: "O Moses! In this land are a people of exceeding strength: Never shall we enter it until they leave it: if (once) they leave, then shall we enter."

قال رجلان من الذين يخافون أنعم الله عليهما ادخلوا عليهم الباب فإذا دخلتموه فإنكم غالبون وعلى الله فتوكلوا إن كنتم مؤمنين
(But) among (their) Allah-fearing men were two on whom Allah had bestowed His grace: They said: "Assault them at the (proper) Gate: when once ye are in, victory will be yours; But on Allah put your trust if ye have faith."

قالوا يا موسى إنا لن ندخلها أبدا ما داموا فيها فاذهب أنت وربك فقاتلا إنا هاهنا قاعدون
They said: "O Moses! while they remain there, never shall we be able to enter, to the end of time. Go thou, and thy Lord, and fight ye two, while we sit here (and watch)."

قال رب إني لا أملك إلا نفسي وأخي فافرق بيننا وبين القوم الفاسقين
He said: "O my Lord! I have power only over myself and my brother: so separate us from this rebellious people!"

قال فإنها محرمة عليهم أربعين سنة يتيهون في الأرض فلا تأس على القوم الفاسقين
Allah said: "Therefore will the land be out of their reach for forty years: In distraction will they wander through the land: But sorrow thou not over these rebellious people.

واتل عليهم نبأ ابني آدم بالحق إذ قربا قربانا فتقبل من أحدهما ولم يتقبل من الآخر قال لأقتلنك قال إنما يتقبل الله من المتقين
Recite to them the truth of the story of the two sons of Adam. Behold! they each presented a sacrifice (to Allah): It was accepted from one, but not from the other. Said the latter: "Be sure I will slay thee." "Surely," said the former, "Allah doth accept of the sacrifice of those who are righteous.

لئن بسطت إلي يدك لتقتلني ما أنا بباسط يدي إليك لأقتلك إني أخاف الله رب العالمين
"If thou dost stretch thy hand against me, to slay me, it is not for me to stretch my hand against thee to slay thee: for I do fear Allah, the cherisher of the worlds.

إني أريد أن تبوء بإثمي وإثمك فتكون من أصحاب النار وذلك جزاء الظالمين
"For me, I intend to let thee draw on thyself my sin as well as thine, for thou wilt be among the companions of the fire, and that is the reward of those who do wrong."

فطوعت له نفسه قتل أخيه فقتله فأصبح من الخاسرين
The (selfish) soul of the other led him to the murder of his brother: he murdered him, and became (himself) one of the lost ones.

فبعث الله غرابا يبحث في الأرض ليريه كيف يواري سوءة أخيه قال يا ويلتى أعجزت أن أكون مثل هذا الغراب فأواري سوءة أخي فأصبح من النادمين
Then Allah sent a raven, who scratched the ground, to show him how to hide the shame of his brother. "Woe is me!" said he; "Was I not even able to be as this raven, and to hide the shame of my brother?" then he became full of regrets-

من أجل ذلك كتبنا على بني إسرائيل أنه من قتل نفسا بغير نفس أو فساد في الأرض فكأنما قتل الناس جميعا ومن أحياها فكأنما أحيا الناس جميعا ولقد جاءتهم رسلنا بالبينات ثم إن كثيرا منهم بعد ذلك في الأرض لمسرفون
On that account: We ordained for the Children of Israel that if any one slew a person - unless it be for murder or for spreading mischief in the land - it would be as if he slew the whole people: and if any one saved a life, it would be as if he saved the life of the whole people. Then although there came to them Our messengers with clear signs, yet, even after that, many of them continued to commit excesses in the land.

إنما جزاء الذين يحاربون الله ورسوله ويسعون في الأرض فسادا أن يقتلوا أو يصلبوا أو تقطع أيديهم وأرجلهم من خلاف أو ينفوا من الأرض ذلك لهم خزي في الدنيا ولهم في الآخرة عذاب عظيم
The punishment of those who wage war against Allah and His Messenger, and strive with might and main for mischief through the land is: execution, or crucifixion, or the cutting off of hands and feet from opposite sides, or exile from the land: that is their disgrace in this world, and a heavy punishment is theirs in the Hereafter;

إلا الذين تابوا من قبل أن تقدروا عليهم فاعلموا أن الله غفور رحيم
Except for those who repent before they fall into your power: in that case, know that Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا اتقوا الله وابتغوا إليه الوسيلة وجاهدوا في سبيله لعلكم تفلحون
O ye who believe! Do your duty to Allah, seek the means of approach unto Him, and strive with might and main in his cause: that ye may prosper.

إن الذين كفروا لو أن لهم ما في الأرض جميعا ومثله معه ليفتدوا به من عذاب يوم القيامة ما تقبل منهم ولهم عذاب أليم
As to those who reject Faith,- if they had everything on earth, and twice repeated, to give as ransom for the penalty of the Day of Judgment, it would never be accepted of them, theirs would be a grievous penalty.

يريدون أن يخرجوا من النار وما هم بخارجين منها ولهم عذاب مقيم
Their wish will be to get out of the Fire, but never will they get out therefrom: their penalty will be one that endures.

والسارق والسارقة فاقطعوا أيديهما جزاء بما كسبا نكالا من الله والله عزيز حكيم
As to the thief, Male or female, cut off his or her hands: a punishment by way of example, from Allah, for their crime: and Allah is Exalted in power.

فمن تاب من بعد ظلمه وأصلح فإن الله يتوب عليه إن الله غفور رحيم
But if the thief repents after his crime, and amends his conduct, Allah turneth to him in forgiveness; for Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

ألم تعلم أن الله له ملك السماوات والأرض يعذب من يشاء ويغفر لمن يشاء والله على كل شيء قدير
Knowest thou not that to Allah (alone) belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth? He punisheth whom He pleaseth, and He forgiveth whom He pleaseth: and Allah hath power over all things.

يا أيها الرسول لا يحزنك الذين يسارعون في الكفر من الذين قالوا آمنا بأفواههم ولم تؤمن قلوبهم ومن الذين هادوا سماعون للكذب سماعون لقوم آخرين لم يأتوك يحرفون الكلم من بعد مواضعه يقولون إن أوتيتم هذا فخذوه وإن لم تؤتوه فاحذروا ومن يرد الله فتنته فلن تملك له من الله شيئا أولئك الذين لم يرد الله أن يطهر قلوبهم لهم في الدنيا خزي ولهم في الآخرة عذاب عظيم
O Messenger! let not those grieve thee, who race each other into unbelief: (whether it be) among those who say "We believe" with their lips but whose hearts have no faith; or it be among the Jews,- men who will listen to any lie,- will listen even to others who have never so much as come to thee. They change the words from their (right) times and places: they say, "If ye are given this, take it, but if not, beware!" If any one's trial is intended by Allah, thou hast no authority in the least for him against Allah. For such - it is not Allah's will to purify their hearts. For them there is disgrace in this world, and in the Hereafter a heavy punishment.

سماعون للكذب أكالون للسحت فإن جاءوك فاحكم بينهم أو أعرض عنهم وإن تعرض عنهم فلن يضروك شيئا وإن حكمت فاحكم بينهم بالقسط إن الله يحب المقسطين
(They are fond of) listening to falsehood, of devouring anything forbidden. If they do come to thee, either judge between them, or decline to interfere. If thou decline, they cannot hurt thee in the least. If thou judge, judge in equity between them. For Allah loveth those who judge in equity.

وكيف يحكمونك وعندهم التوراة فيها حكم الله ثم يتولون من بعد ذلك وما أولئك بالمؤمنين
But why do they come to thee for decision, when they have (their own) law before them?- therein is the (plain) command of Allah; yet even after that, they would turn away. For they are not (really) People of Faith.

إنا أنزلنا التوراة فيها هدى ونور يحكم بها النبيون الذين أسلموا للذين هادوا والربانيون والأحبار بما استحفظوا من كتاب الله وكانوا عليه شهداء فلا تخشوا الناس واخشون ولا تشتروا بآياتي ثمنا قليلا ومن لم يحكم بما أنزل الله فأولئك هم الكافرون
It was We who revealed the law (to Moses): therein was guidance and light. By its standard have been judged the Jews, by the prophets who bowed (as in Islam) to Allah's will, by the rabbis and the doctors of law: for to them was entrusted the protection of Allah's book, and they were witnesses thereto: therefore fear not men, but fear me, and sell not my signs for a miserable price. If any do fail to judge by (the light of) what Allah hath revealed, they are (no better than) Unbelievers.

وكتبنا عليهم فيها أن النفس بالنفس والعين بالعين والأنف بالأنف والأذن بالأذن والسن بالسن والجروح قصاص فمن تصدق به فهو كفارة له ومن لم يحكم بما أنزل الله فأولئك هم الظالمون
We ordained therein for them: "Life for life, eye for eye, nose or nose, ear for ear, tooth for tooth, and wounds equal for equal." But if any one remits the retaliation by way of charity, it is an act of atonement for himself. And if any fail to judge by (the light of) what Allah hath revealed, they are (No better than) wrong-doers.

وقفينا على آثارهم بعيسى ابن مريم مصدقا لما بين يديه من التوراة وآتيناه الإنجيل فيه هدى ونور ومصدقا لما بين يديه من التوراة وهدى وموعظة للمتقين
And in their footsteps We sent Jesus the son of Mary, confirming the Law that had come before him: We sent him the Gospel: therein was guidance and light, and confirmation of the Law that had come before him: a guidance and an admonition to those who fear Allah.

وليحكم أهل الإنجيل بما أنزل الله فيه ومن لم يحكم بما أنزل الله فأولئك هم الفاسقون
Let the people of the Gospel judge by what Allah hath revealed therein. If any do fail to judge by (the light of) what Allah hath revealed, they are (no better than) those who rebel.

وأنزلنا إليك الكتاب بالحق مصدقا لما بين يديه من الكتاب ومهيمنا عليه فاحكم بينهم بما أنزل الله ولا تتبع أهواءهم عما جاءك من الحق لكل جعلنا منكم شرعة ومنهاجا ولو شاء الله لجعلكم أمة واحدة ولكن ليبلوكم في ما آتاكم فاستبقوا الخيرات إلى الله مرجعكم جميعا فينبئكم بما كنتم فيه تختلفون
To thee We sent the Scripture in truth, confirming the scripture that came before it, and guarding it in safety: so judge between them by what Allah hath revealed, and follow not their vain desires, diverging from the Truth that hath come to thee. To each among you have we prescribed a law and an open way. If Allah had so willed, He would have made you a single people, but (His plan is) to test you in what He hath given you: so strive as in a race in all virtues. The goal of you all is to Allah; it is He that will show you the truth of the matters in which ye dispute;

وأن احكم بينهم بما أنزل الله ولا تتبع أهواءهم واحذرهم أن يفتنوك عن بعض ما أنزل الله إليك فإن تولوا فاعلم أنما يريد الله أن يصيبهم ببعض ذنوبهم وإن كثيرا من الناس لفاسقون
And this (He commands): Judge thou between them by what Allah hath revealed, and follow not their vain desires, but beware of them lest they beguile thee from any of that (teaching) which Allah hath sent down to thee. And if they turn away, be assured that for some of their crime it is Allah's purpose to punish them. And truly most men are rebellious.

أفحكم الجاهلية يبغون ومن أحسن من الله حكما لقوم يوقنون
Do they then seek after a judgment of (the days of) ignorance? But who, for a people whose faith is assured, can give better judgment than Allah?

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تتخذوا اليهود والنصارى أولياء بعضهم أولياء بعض ومن يتولهم منكم فإنه منهم إن الله لا يهدي القوم الظالمين
O ye who believe! take not the Jews and the Christians for your friends and protectors: They are but friends and protectors to each other. And he amongst you that turns to them (for friendship) is of them. Verily Allah guideth not a people unjust.

فترى الذين في قلوبهم مرض يسارعون فيهم يقولون نخشى أن تصيبنا دائرة فعسى الله أن يأتي بالفتح أو أمر من عنده فيصبحوا على ما أسروا في أنفسهم نادمين
Those in whose hearts is a disease - thou seest how eagerly they run about amongst them, saying: "We do fear lest a change of fortune bring us disaster." Ah! perhaps Allah will give (thee) victory, or a decision according to His will. Then will they repent of the thoughts which they secretly harboured in their hearts.

ويقول الذين آمنوا أهؤلاء الذين أقسموا بالله جهد أيمانهم إنهم لمعكم حبطت أعمالهم فأصبحوا خاسرين
And those who believe will say: "Are these the men who swore their strongest oaths by Allah, that they were with you?" All that they do will be in vain, and they will fall into (nothing but) ruin.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا من يرتد منكم عن دينه فسوف يأتي الله بقوم يحبهم ويحبونه أذلة على المؤمنين أعزة على الكافرين يجاهدون في سبيل الله ولا يخافون لومة لائم ذلك فضل الله يؤتيه من يشاء والله واسع عليم
O ye who believe! if any from among you turn back from his Faith, soon will Allah produce a people whom He will love as they will love Him,- lowly with the believers, mighty against the rejecters, fighting in the way of Allah, and never afraid of the reproaches of such as find fault. That is the grace of Allah, which He will bestow on whom He pleaseth. And Allah encompasseth all, and He knoweth all things.

إنما وليكم الله ورسوله والذين آمنوا الذين يقيمون الصلاة ويؤتون الزكاة وهم راكعون
Your (real) friends are (no less than) Allah, His Messenger, and the (fellowship of) believers,- those who establish regular prayers and regular charity, and they bow down humbly (in worship).

ومن يتول الله ورسوله والذين آمنوا فإن حزب الله هم الغالبون
As to those who turn (for friendship) to Allah, His Messenger, and the (fellowship of) believers,- it is the fellowship of Allah that must certainly triumph.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تتخذوا الذين اتخذوا دينكم هزوا ولعبا من الذين أوتوا الكتاب من قبلكم والكفار أولياء واتقوا الله إن كنتم مؤمنين
O ye who believe! take not for friends and protectors those who take your religion for a mockery or sport,- whether among those who received the Scripture before you, or among those who reject Faith; but fear ye Allah, if ye have faith (indeed).

وإذا ناديتم إلى الصلاة اتخذوها هزوا ولعبا ذلك بأنهم قوم لا يعقلون
When ye proclaim your call to prayer they take it (but) as mockery and sport; that is because they are a people without understanding.

قل يا أهل الكتاب هل تنقمون منا إلا أن آمنا بالله وما أنزل إلينا وما أنزل من قبل وأن أكثركم فاسقون
Say: "O people of the Book! Do ye disapprove of us for no other reason than that we believe in Allah, and the revelation that hath come to us and that which came before (us), and (perhaps) that most of you are rebellious and disobedient?"

قل هل أنبئكم بشر من ذلك مثوبة عند الله من لعنه الله وغضب عليه وجعل منهم القردة والخنازير وعبد الطاغوت أولئك شر مكانا وأضل عن سواء السبيل
Say: "Shall I point out to you something much worse than this, (as judged) by the treatment it received from Allah? those who incurred the curse of Allah and His wrath, those of whom some He transformed into apes and swine, those who worshipped evil;- these are (many times) worse in rank, and far more astray from the even path!"

وإذا جاءوكم قالوا آمنا وقد دخلوا بالكفر وهم قد خرجوا به والله أعلم بما كانوا يكتمون
When they come to thee, they say: "We believe": but in fact they enter with a mind against Faith, and they go out with the same but Allah knoweth fully all that they hide.

وترى كثيرا منهم يسارعون في الإثم والعدوان وأكلهم السحت لبئس ما كانوا يعملون
Many of them dost thou see, racing each other in sin and rancour, and their eating of things forbidden. Evil indeed are the things that they do.

لولا ينهاهم الربانيون والأحبار عن قولهم الإثم وأكلهم السحت لبئس ما كانوا يصنعون
Why do not the rabbis and the doctors of Law forbid them from their (habit of) uttering sinful words and eating things forbidden? Evil indeed are their works.

وقالت اليهود يد الله مغلولة غلت أيديهم ولعنوا بما قالوا بل يداه مبسوطتان ينفق كيف يشاء وليزيدن كثيرا منهم ما أنزل إليك من ربك طغيانا وكفرا وألقينا بينهم العداوة والبغضاء إلى يوم القيامة كلما أوقدوا نارا للحرب أطفأها الله ويسعون في الأرض فسادا والله لا يحب المفسدين
The Jews say: "Allah's hand is tied up." Be their hands tied up and be they accursed for the (blasphemy) they utter. Nay, both His hands are widely outstretched: He giveth and spendeth (of His bounty) as He pleaseth. But the revelation that cometh to thee from Allah increaseth in most of them their obstinate rebellion and blasphemy. Amongst them we have placed enmity and hatred till the Day of Judgment. Every time they kindle the fire of war, Allah doth extinguish it; but they (ever) strive to do mischief on earth. And Allah loveth not those who do mischief.

ولو أن أهل الكتاب آمنوا واتقوا لكفرنا عنهم سيئاتهم ولأدخلناهم جنات النعيم
If only the People of the Book had believed and been righteous, We should indeed have blotted out their iniquities and admitted them to gardens of bliss.

ولو أنهم أقاموا التوراة والإنجيل وما أنزل إليهم من ربهم لأكلوا من فوقهم ومن تحت أرجلهم منهم أمة مقتصدة وكثير منهم ساء ما يعملون
If only they had stood fast by the Law, the Gospel, and all the revelation that was sent to them from their Lord, they would have enjoyed happiness from every side. There is from among them a party on the right course: but many of them follow a course that is evil.

يا أيها الرسول بلغ ما أنزل إليك من ربك وإن لم تفعل فما بلغت رسالته والله يعصمك من الناس إن الله لا يهدي القوم الكافرين
O Messenger! proclaim the (message) which hath been sent to thee from thy Lord. If thou didst not, thou wouldst not have fulfilled and proclaimed His mission. And Allah will defend thee from men (who mean mischief). For Allah guideth not those who reject Faith.

قل يا أهل الكتاب لستم على شيء حتى تقيموا التوراة والإنجيل وما أنزل إليكم من ربكم وليزيدن كثيرا منهم ما أنزل إليك من ربك طغيانا وكفرا فلا تأس على القوم الكافرين
Say: "O People of the Book! ye have no ground to stand upon unless ye stand fast by the Law, the Gospel, and all the revelation that has come to you from your Lord." It is the revelation that cometh to thee from thy Lord, that increaseth in most of them their obstinate rebellion and blasphemy. But sorrow thou not over (these) people without Faith.

إن الذين آمنوا والذين هادوا والصابئون والنصارى من آمن بالله واليوم الآخر وعمل صالحا فلا خوف عليهم ولا هم يحزنون
Those who believe (in the Qur'an), those who follow the Jewish (scriptures), and the Sabians and the Christians,- any who believe in Allah and the Last Day, and work righteousness,- on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.

لقد أخذنا ميثاق بني إسرائيل وأرسلنا إليهم رسلا كلما جاءهم رسول بما لا تهوى أنفسهم فريقا كذبوا وفريقا يقتلون
We took the covenant of the Children of Israel and sent them messengers, every time, there came to them a messenger with what they themselves desired not - some (of these) they called impostors, and some they (go so far as to) slay.

وحسبوا ألا تكون فتنة فعموا وصموا ثم تاب الله عليهم ثم عموا وصموا كثير منهم والله بصير بما يعملون
They thought there would be no trial (or punishment); so they became blind and deaf; yet Allah (in mercy) turned to them; yet again many of them became blind and deaf. But Allah sees well all that they do.

لقد كفر الذين قالوا إن الله هو المسيح ابن مريم وقال المسيح يا بني إسرائيل اعبدوا الله ربي وربكم إنه من يشرك بالله فقد حرم الله عليه الجنة ومأواه النار وما للظالمين من أنصار
They do blaspheme who say: "Allah is Christ the son of Mary." But said Christ: "O Children of Israel! worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord." Whoever joins other gods with Allah,- Allah will forbid him the garden, and the Fire will be his abode. There will for the wrong-doers be no one to help.

لقد كفر الذين قالوا إن الله ثالث ثلاثة وما من إله إلا إله واحد وإن لم ينتهوا عما يقولون ليمسن الذين كفروا منهم عذاب أليم
They do blaspheme who say: Allah is one of three in a Trinity: for there is no god except One Allah. If they desist not from their word (of blasphemy), verily a grievous penalty will befall the blasphemers among them.

أفلا يتوبون إلى الله ويستغفرونه والله غفور رحيم
Why turn they not to Allah, and seek His forgiveness? For Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

ما المسيح ابن مريم إلا رسول قد خلت من قبله الرسل وأمه صديقة كانا يأكلان الطعام انظر كيف نبين لهم الآيات ثم انظر أنى يؤفكون
Christ the son of Mary was no more than a messenger; many were the messengers that passed away before him. His mother was a woman of truth. They had both to eat their (daily) food. See how Allah doth make His signs clear to them; yet see in what ways they are deluded away from the truth!

قل أتعبدون من دون الله ما لا يملك لكم ضرا ولا نفعا والله هو السميع العليم
Say: "Will ye worship, besides Allah, something which hath no power either to harm or benefit you? But Allah,- He it is that heareth and knoweth all things."

قل يا أهل الكتاب لا تغلوا في دينكم غير الحق ولا تتبعوا أهواء قوم قد ضلوا من قبل وأضلوا كثيرا وضلوا عن سواء السبيل
Say: "O people of the Book! exceed not in your religion the bounds (of what is proper), trespassing beyond the truth, nor follow the vain desires of people who went wrong in times gone by,- who misled many, and strayed (themselves) from the even way.

لعن الذين كفروا من بني إسرائيل على لسان داوود وعيسى ابن مريم ذلك بما عصوا وكانوا يعتدون
Curses were pronounced on those among the Children of Israel who rejected Faith, by the tongue of David and of Jesus the son of Mary: because they disobeyed and persisted in excesses.

كانوا لا يتناهون عن منكر فعلوه لبئس ما كانوا يفعلون
Nor did they (usually) forbid one another the iniquities which they committed: evil indeed were the deeds which they did.

ترى كثيرا منهم يتولون الذين كفروا لبئس ما قدمت لهم أنفسهم أن سخط الله عليهم وفي العذاب هم خالدون
Thou seest many of them turning in friendship to the Unbelievers. Evil indeed are (the works) which their souls have sent forward before them (with the result), that Allah's wrath is on them, and in torment will they abide.

ولو كانوا يؤمنون بالله والنبي وما أنزل إليه ما اتخذوهم أولياء ولكن كثيرا منهم فاسقون
If only they had believed in Allah, in the Prophet, and in what hath been revealed to him, never would they have taken them for friends and protectors, but most of them are rebellious wrong-doers.

لتجدن أشد الناس عداوة للذين آمنوا اليهود والذين أشركوا ولتجدن أقربهم مودة للذين آمنوا الذين قالوا إنا نصارى ذلك بأن منهم قسيسين ورهبانا وأنهم لا يستكبرون
Strongest among men in enmity to the believers wilt thou find the Jews and Pagans; and nearest among them in love to the believers wilt thou find those who say, "We are Christians": because amongst these are men devoted to learning and men who have renounced the world, and they are not arrogant.

وإذا سمعوا ما أنزل إلى الرسول ترى أعينهم تفيض من الدمع مما عرفوا من الحق يقولون ربنا آمنا فاكتبنا مع الشاهدين
And when they listen to the revelation received by the Messenger, thou wilt see their eyes overflowing with tears, for they recognise the truth: they pray: "Our Lord! we believe; write us down among the witnesses.

وما لنا لا نؤمن بالله وما جاءنا من الحق ونطمع أن يدخلنا ربنا مع القوم الصالحين
"What cause can we have not to believe in Allah and the truth which has come to us, seeing that we long for our Lord to admit us to the company of the righteous?"

فأثابهم الله بما قالوا جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها وذلك جزاء المحسنين
And for this their prayer hath Allah rewarded them with gardens, with rivers flowing underneath,- their eternal home. Such is the recompense of those who do good.

والذين كفروا وكذبوا بآياتنا أولئك أصحاب الجحيم
But those who reject Faith and belie our Signs,- they shall be companions of Hell-fire.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تحرموا طيبات ما أحل الله لكم ولا تعتدوا إن الله لا يحب المعتدين
O ye who believe! make not unlawful the good things which Allah hath made lawful for you, but commit no excess: for Allah loveth not those given to excess.

وكلوا مما رزقكم الله حلالا طيبا واتقوا الله الذي أنتم به مؤمنون
Eat of the things which Allah hath provided for you, lawful and good; but fear Allah, in Whom ye believe.

لا يؤاخذكم الله باللغو في أيمانكم ولكن يؤاخذكم بما عقدتم الأيمان فكفارته إطعام عشرة مساكين من أوسط ما تطعمون أهليكم أو كسوتهم أو تحرير رقبة فمن لم يجد فصيام ثلاثة أيام ذلك كفارة أيمانكم إذا حلفتم واحفظوا أيمانكم كذلك يبين الله لكم آياته لعلكم تشكرون
Allah will not call you to account for what is futile in your oaths, but He will call you to account for your deliberate oaths: for expiation, feed ten indigent persons, on a scale of the average for the food of your families; or clothe them; or give a slave his freedom. If that is beyond your means, fast for three days. That is the expiation for the oaths ye have sworn. But keep to your oaths. Thus doth Allah make clear to you His signs, that ye may be grateful.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إنما الخمر والميسر والأنصاب والأزلام رجس من عمل الشيطان فاجتنبوه لعلكم تفلحون
O ye who believe! Intoxicants and gambling, (dedication of) stones, and (divination by) arrows, are an abomination,- of Satan's handwork: eschew such (abomination), that ye may prosper.

إنما يريد الشيطان أن يوقع بينكم العداوة والبغضاء في الخمر والميسر ويصدكم عن ذكر الله وعن الصلاة فهل أنتم منتهون
Satan's plan is (but) to excite enmity and hatred between you, with intoxicants and gambling, and hinder you from the remembrance of Allah, and from prayer: will ye not then abstain?

وأطيعوا الله وأطيعوا الرسول واحذروا فإن توليتم فاعلموا أنما على رسولنا البلاغ المبين
Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger, and beware (of evil): if ye do turn back, know ye that it is Our Messenger's duty to proclaim (the message) in the clearest manner.

ليس على الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات جناح فيما طعموا إذا ما اتقوا وآمنوا وعملوا الصالحات ثم اتقوا وآمنوا ثم اتقوا وأحسنوا والله يحب المحسنين
On those who believe and do deeds of righteousness there is no blame for what they ate (in the past), when they guard themselves from evil, and believe, and do deeds of righteousness,- (or) again, guard themselves from evil and believe,- (or) again, guard themselves from evil and do good. For Allah loveth those who do good.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا ليبلونكم الله بشيء من الصيد تناله أيديكم ورماحكم ليعلم الله من يخافه بالغيب فمن اعتدى بعد ذلك فله عذاب أليم
O ye who believe! Allah doth but make a trial of you in a little matter of game well within reach of game well within reach of your hands and your lances, that He may test who feareth him unseen: any who transgress thereafter, will have a grievous penalty.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تقتلوا الصيد وأنتم حرم ومن قتله منكم متعمدا فجزاء مثل ما قتل من النعم يحكم به ذوا عدل منكم هديا بالغ الكعبة أو كفارة طعام مساكين أو عدل ذلك صياما ليذوق وبال أمره عفا الله عما سلف ومن عاد فينتقم الله منه والله عزيز ذو انتقام
O ye who believe! Kill not game while in the sacred precincts or in pilgrim garb. If any of you doth so intentionally, the compensation is an offering, brought to the Ka'ba, of a domestic animal equivalent to the one he killed, as adjudged by two just men among you; or by way of atonement, the feeding of the indigent; or its equivalent in fasts: that he may taste of the penalty of his deed. Allah forgives what is past: for repetition Allah will exact from him the penalty. For Allah is Exalted, and Lord of Retribution.

أحل لكم صيد البحر وطعامه متاعا لكم وللسيارة وحرم عليكم صيد البر ما دمتم حرما واتقوا الله الذي إليه تحشرون
Lawful to you is the pursuit of water-game and its use for food,- for the benefit of yourselves and those who travel; but forbidden is the pursuit of land-game;- as long as ye are in the sacred precincts or in pilgrim garb. And fear Allah, to Whom ye shall be gathered back.

جعل الله الكعبة البيت الحرام قياما للناس والشهر الحرام والهدي والقلائد ذلك لتعلموا أن الله يعلم ما في السماوات وما في الأرض وأن الله بكل شيء عليم
Allah made the Ka'ba, the Sacred House, an asylum of security for men, as also the Sacred Months, the animals for offerings, and the garlands that mark them: That ye may know that Allah hath knowledge of what is in the heavens and on earth and that Allah is well acquainted with all things.

اعلموا أن الله شديد العقاب وأن الله غفور رحيم
Know ye that Allah is strict in punishment and that Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

ما على الرسول إلا البلاغ والله يعلم ما تبدون وما تكتمون
The Messenger's duty is but to proclaim (the message). But Allah knoweth all that ye reveal and ye conceal.

قل لا يستوي الخبيث والطيب ولو أعجبك كثرة الخبيث فاتقوا الله يا أولي الألباب لعلكم تفلحون
Say: "Not equal are things that are bad and things that are good, even though the abundance of the bad may dazzle thee; so fear Allah, O ye that understand; that (so) ye may prosper."

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تسألوا عن أشياء إن تبد لكم تسؤكم وإن تسألوا عنها حين ينزل القرآن تبد لكم عفا الله عنها والله غفور حليم
O ye who believe! Ask not questions about things which, if made plain to you, may cause you trouble. But if ye ask about things when the Qur'an is being revealed, they will be made plain to you, Allah will forgive those: for Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Forbearing.

قد سألها قوم من قبلكم ثم أصبحوا بها كافرين
Some people before you did ask such questions, and on that account lost their faith.

ما جعل الله من بحيرة ولا سائبة ولا وصيلة ولا حام ولكن الذين كفروا يفترون على الله الكذب وأكثرهم لا يعقلون
It was not Allah who instituted (superstitions like those of) a slit-ear she-camel, or a she-camel let loose for free pasture, or idol sacrifices for twin-births in animals, or stallion-camels freed from work: It is blasphemers who invent a lie against Allah; but most of them lack wisdom.

وإذا قيل لهم تعالوا إلى ما أنزل الله وإلى الرسول قالوا حسبنا ما وجدنا عليه آباءنا أولو كان آباؤهم لا يعلمون شيئا ولا يهتدون
When it is said to them: "Come to what Allah hath revealed; come to the Messenger": They say: "Enough for us are the ways we found our fathers following." what! even though their fathers were void of knowledge and guidance?

يا أيها الذين آمنوا عليكم أنفسكم لا يضركم من ضل إذا اهتديتم إلى الله مرجعكم جميعا فينبئكم بما كنتم تعملون
O ye who believe! Guard your own souls: If ye follow (right) guidance, no hurt can come to you from those who stray. the goal of you all is to Allah: it is He that will show you the truth of all that ye do.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا شهادة بينكم إذا حضر أحدكم الموت حين الوصية اثنان ذوا عدل منكم أو آخران من غيركم إن أنتم ضربتم في الأرض فأصابتكم مصيبة الموت تحبسونهما من بعد الصلاة فيقسمان بالله إن ارتبتم لا نشتري به ثمنا ولو كان ذا قربى ولا نكتم شهادة الله إنا إذا لمن الآثمين
O ye who believe! When death approaches any of you, (take) witnesses among yourselves when making bequests,- two just men of your own (brotherhood) or others from outside if ye are journeying through the earth, and the chance of death befalls you (thus). If ye doubt (their truth), detain them both after prayer, and let them both swear by Allah: "We wish not in this for any worldly gain, even though the (beneficiary) be our near relation: we shall hide not the evidence before Allah: if we do, then behold! the sin be upon us!"

فإن عثر على أنهما استحقا إثما فآخران يقومان مقامهما من الذين استحق عليهم الأوليان فيقسمان بالله لشهادتنا أحق من شهادتهما وما اعتدينا إنا إذا لمن الظالمين
But if it gets known that these two were guilty of the sin (of perjury), let two others stand forth in their places,- nearest in kin from among those who claim a lawful right: let them swear by Allah: "We affirm that our witness is truer than that of those two, and that we have not trespassed (beyond the truth): if we did, behold! the wrong be upon us!"

ذلك أدنى أن يأتوا بالشهادة على وجهها أو يخافوا أن ترد أيمان بعد أيمانهم واتقوا الله واسمعوا والله لا يهدي القوم الفاسقين
That is most suitable: that they may give the evidence in its true nature and shape, or else they would fear that other oaths would be taken after their oaths. But fear Allah, and listen (to His counsel): for Allah guideth not a rebellious people:

يوم يجمع الله الرسل فيقول ماذا أجبتم قالوا لا علم لنا إنك أنت علام الغيوب
One day will Allah gather the messengers together, and ask: "What was the response ye received (from men to your teaching)?" They will say: "We have no knowledge: it is Thou Who knowest in full all that is hidden."

إذ قال الله يا عيسى ابن مريم اذكر نعمتي عليك وعلى والدتك إذ أيدتك بروح القدس تكلم الناس في المهد وكهلا وإذ علمتك الكتاب والحكمة والتوراة والإنجيل وإذ تخلق من الطين كهيئة الطير بإذني فتنفخ فيها فتكون طيرا بإذني وتبرئ الأكمه والأبرص بإذني وإذ تخرج الموتى بإذني وإذ كففت بني إسرائيل عنك إذ جئتهم بالبينات فقال الذين كفروا منهم إن هذا إلا سحر مبين
Then will Allah say: "O Jesus the son of Mary! Recount My favour to thee and to thy mother. Behold! I strengthened thee with the holy spirit, so that thou didst speak to the people in childhood and in maturity. Behold! I taught thee the Book and Wisdom, the Law and the Gospel and behold! thou makest out of clay, as it were, the figure of a bird, by My leave, and thou breathest into it and it becometh a bird by My leave, and thou healest those born blind, and the lepers, by My leave. And behold! thou bringest forth the dead by My leave. And behold! I did restrain the Children of Israel from (violence to) thee when thou didst show them the clear Signs, and the unbelievers among them said: 'This is nothing but evident magic.'

وإذ أوحيت إلى الحواريين أن آمنوا بي وبرسولي قالوا آمنا واشهد بأننا مسلمون
"And behold! I inspired the disciples to have faith in Me and Mine Messenger: they said, 'We have faith, and do thou bear witness that we bow to Allah as Muslims'".

إذ قال الحواريون يا عيسى ابن مريم هل يستطيع ربك أن ينزل علينا مائدة من السماء قال اتقوا الله إن كنتم مؤمنين
Behold! the disciples, said: "O Jesus the son of Mary! can thy Lord send down to us a table set (with viands) from heaven?" Said Jesus: "Fear Allah, if ye have faith."

قالوا نريد أن نأكل منها وتطمئن قلوبنا ونعلم أن قد صدقتنا ونكون عليها من الشاهدين
They said: "We only wish to eat thereof and satisfy our hearts, and to know that thou hast indeed told us the truth; and that we ourselves may be witnesses to the miracle."

قال عيسى ابن مريم اللهم ربنا أنزل علينا مائدة من السماء تكون لنا عيدا لأولنا وآخرنا وآية منك وارزقنا وأنت خير الرازقين
Said Jesus the son of Mary: "O Allah our Lord! Send us from heaven a table set (with viands), that there may be for us - for the first and the last of us - a solemn festival and a sign from thee; and provide for our sustenance, for thou art the best Sustainer (of our needs)."

قال الله إني منزلها عليكم فمن يكفر بعد منكم فإني أعذبه عذابا لا أعذبه أحدا من العالمين
Allah said: "I will send it down unto you: But if any of you after that resisteth faith, I will punish him with a penalty such as I have not inflicted on any one among all the peoples."

وإذ قال الله يا عيسى ابن مريم أأنت قلت للناس اتخذوني وأمي إلهين من دون الله قال سبحانك ما يكون لي أن أقول ما ليس لي بحق إن كنت قلته فقد علمته تعلم ما في نفسي ولا أعلم ما في نفسك إنك أنت علام الغيوب
And behold! Allah will say: "O Jesus the son of Mary! Didst thou say unto men, worship me and my mother as gods in derogation of Allah'?" He will say: "Glory to Thee! never could I say what I had no right (to say). Had I said such a thing, thou wouldst indeed have known it. Thou knowest what is in my heart, Thou I know not what is in Thine. For Thou knowest in full all that is hidden.

ما قلت لهم إلا ما أمرتني به أن اعبدوا الله ربي وربكم وكنت عليهم شهيدا ما دمت فيهم فلما توفيتني كنت أنت الرقيب عليهم وأنت على كل شيء شهيد
"Never said I to them aught except what Thou didst command me to say, to wit, 'worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord'; and I was a witness over them whilst I dwelt amongst them; when Thou didst take me up Thou wast the Watcher over them, and Thou art a witness to all things.

إن تعذبهم فإنهم عبادك وإن تغفر لهم فإنك أنت العزيز الحكيم
"If Thou dost punish them, they are Thy servant: If Thou dost forgive them, Thou art the Exalted in power, the Wise."

قال الله هذا يوم ينفع الصادقين صدقهم لهم جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها أبدا رضي الله عنهم ورضوا عنه ذلك الفوز العظيم
Allah will say: "This is a day on which the truthful will profit from their truth: theirs are gardens, with rivers flowing beneath,- their eternal Home: Allah well-pleased with them, and they with Allah: That is the great salvation, (the fulfilment of all desires).

لله ملك السماوات والأرض وما فيهن وهو على كل شيء قدير
To Allah doth belong the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and all that is therein, and it is He Who hath power over all things.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الحمد لله الذي خلق السماوات والأرض وجعل الظلمات والنور ثم الذين كفروا بربهم يعدلون
Praise be Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, and made the darkness and the light. Yet those who reject Faith hold (others) as equal, with their Guardian-Lord.

هو الذي خلقكم من طين ثم قضى أجلا وأجل مسمى عنده ثم أنتم تمترون
He it is created you from clay, and then decreed a stated term (for you). And there is in His presence another determined term; yet ye doubt within yourselves!

وهو الله في السماوات وفي الأرض يعلم سركم وجهركم ويعلم ما تكسبون
And He is Allah in the heavens and on earth. He knoweth what ye hide, and what ye reveal, and He knoweth the (recompense) which ye earn (by your deeds).

وما تأتيهم من آية من آيات ربهم إلا كانوا عنها معرضين
But never did a single one of the signs of their Lord reach them, but they turned away therefrom.

فقد كذبوا بالحق لما جاءهم فسوف يأتيهم أنباء ما كانوا به يستهزئون
And now they reject the truth when it reaches them: but soon shall they learn the reality of what they used to mock at.

ألم يروا كم أهلكنا من قبلهم من قرن مكناهم في الأرض ما لم نمكن لكم وأرسلنا السماء عليهم مدرارا وجعلنا الأنهار تجري من تحتهم فأهلكناهم بذنوبهم وأنشأنا من بعدهم قرنا آخرين
See they not how many of those before them We did destroy?- generations We had established on the earth, in strength such as We have not given to you - for whom We poured out rain from the skies in abundance, and gave (fertile) streams flowing beneath their (feet): yet for their sins We destroyed them, and raised in their wake fresh generations (to succeed them).

ولو نزلنا عليك كتابا في قرطاس فلمسوه بأيديهم لقال الذين كفروا إن هذا إلا سحر مبين
If We had sent unto thee a written (message) on parchment, so that they could touch it with their hands, the Unbelievers would have been sure to say: "This is nothing but obvious magic!"

وقالوا لولا أنزل عليه ملك ولو أنزلنا ملكا لقضي الأمر ثم لا ينظرون
They say: "Why is not an angel sent down to him?" If we did send down an angel, the matter would be settled at once, and no respite would be granted them.

ولو جعلناه ملكا لجعلناه رجلا وللبسنا عليهم ما يلبسون
If We had made it an angel, We should have sent him as a man, and We should certainly have caused them confusion in a matter which they have already covered with confusion.

ولقد استهزئ برسل من قبلك فحاق بالذين سخروا منهم ما كانوا به يستهزئون
Mocked were (many) messengers before thee; but their scoffers were hemmed in by the thing that they mocked.

قل سيروا في الأرض ثم انظروا كيف كان عاقبة المكذبين
Say: "Travel through the earth and see what was the end of those who rejected Truth."

قل لمن ما في السماوات والأرض قل لله كتب على نفسه الرحمة ليجمعنكم إلى يوم القيامة لا ريب فيه الذين خسروا أنفسهم فهم لا يؤمنون
Say: "To whom belongeth all that is in the heavens and on earth?" Say: "To Allah. He hath inscribed for Himself (the rule of) Mercy. That He will gather you together for the Day of Judgment, there is no doubt whatever. It is they who have lost their own souls, that will not believe.

وله ما سكن في الليل والنهار وهو السميع العليم
To him belongeth all that dwelleth (or lurketh) in the night and the day. For he is the one who heareth and knoweth all things."

قل أغير الله أتخذ وليا فاطر السماوات والأرض وهو يطعم ولا يطعم قل إني أمرت أن أكون أول من أسلم ولا تكونن من المشركين
Say: "Shall I take for my protector any other than Allah, the Maker of the heavens and the earth? And He it is that feedeth but is not fed." Say: "Nay! but I am commanded to be the first of those who bow to Allah (in Islam), and be not thou of the company of those who join gods with Allah."

قل إني أخاف إن عصيت ربي عذاب يوم عظيم
Say: "I would, if I disobeyed my Lord, indeed have fear of the penalty of a Mighty Day.

من يصرف عنه يومئذ فقد رحمه وذلك الفوز المبين
"On that day, if the penalty is averted from any, it is due to Allah's mercy; And that would be (Salvation), the obvious fulfilment of all desire.

وإن يمسسك الله بضر فلا كاشف له إلا هو وإن يمسسك بخير فهو على كل شيء قدير
"If Allah touch thee with affliction, none can remove it but He; if He touch thee with happiness, He hath power over all things.

وهو القاهر فوق عباده وهو الحكيم الخبير
"He is the irresistible, (watching) from above over His worshippers; and He is the Wise, acquainted with all things."

قل أي شيء أكبر شهادة قل الله شهيد بيني وبينكم وأوحي إلي هذا القرآن لأنذركم به ومن بلغ أئنكم لتشهدون أن مع الله آلهة أخرى قل لا أشهد قل إنما هو إله واحد وإنني بريء مما تشركون
Say: "What thing is most weighty in evidence?" Say: "Allah is witness between me and you; This Qur'an hath been revealed to me by inspiration, that I may warn you and all whom it reaches. Can ye possibly bear witness that besides Allah there is another Allah?" Say: "Nay! I cannot bear witness!" Say: "But in truth He is the one Allah, and I truly am innocent of (your blasphemy of) joining others with Him."

الذين آتيناهم الكتاب يعرفونه كما يعرفون أبناءهم الذين خسروا أنفسهم فهم لا يؤمنون
Those to whom We have given the Book know this as they know their own sons. Those who have lost their own souls refuse therefore to believe.

ومن أظلم ممن افترى على الله كذبا أو كذب بآياته إنه لا يفلح الظالمون
Who doth more wrong than he who inventeth a lie against Allah or rejecteth His signs? But verily the wrong-doers never shall prosper.

ويوم نحشرهم جميعا ثم نقول للذين أشركوا أين شركاؤكم الذين كنتم تزعمون
One day shall We gather them all together: We shall say to those who ascribed partners (to Us): "Where are the partners whom ye (invented and) talked about?"

ثم لم تكن فتنتهم إلا أن قالوا والله ربنا ما كنا مشركين
There will then be (left) no subterfuge for them but to say: "By Allah our Lord, we were not those who joined gods with Allah."

انظر كيف كذبوا على أنفسهم وضل عنهم ما كانوا يفترون
Behold! how they lie against their own souls! But the (lie) which they invented will leave them in the lurch.

ومنهم من يستمع إليك وجعلنا على قلوبهم أكنة أن يفقهوه وفي آذانهم وقرا وإن يروا كل آية لا يؤمنوا بها حتى إذا جاءوك يجادلونك يقول الذين كفروا إن هذا إلا أساطير الأولين
Of them there are some who (pretend to) listen to thee; but We have thrown veils on their hearts, So they understand it not, and deafness in their ears; if they saw every one of the signs, not they will believe in them; in so much that when they come to thee, they (but) dispute with thee; the Unbelievers say: "These are nothing but tales of the ancients."

وهم ينهون عنه وينأون عنه وإن يهلكون إلا أنفسهم وما يشعرون
Others they keep away from it, and themselves they keep away; but they only destroy their own souls, and they perceive it not.

ولو ترى إذ وقفوا على النار فقالوا يا ليتنا نرد ولا نكذب بآيات ربنا ونكون من المؤمنين
If thou couldst but see when they are confronted with the Fire! They will say: "Would that we were but sent back! Then would we not reject the signs of our Lord, but would be amongst those who believe!"

بل بدا لهم ما كانوا يخفون من قبل ولو ردوا لعادوا لما نهوا عنه وإنهم لكاذبون
Yea, in their own (eyes) will become manifest what before they concealed. But if they were returned, they would certainly relapse to the things they were forbidden, for they are indeed liars.

وقالوا إن هي إلا حياتنا الدنيا وما نحن بمبعوثين
And they (sometimes) say: "There is nothing except our life on this earth, and never shall we be raised up again."

ولو ترى إذ وقفوا على ربهم قال أليس هذا بالحق قالوا بلى وربنا قال فذوقوا العذاب بما كنتم تكفرون
If thou couldst but see when they are confronted with their Lord! He will say: "Is not this the truth?" They will say: "Yea, by our Lord!" He will say: "Taste ye then the penalty, because ye rejected Faith."

قد خسر الذين كذبوا بلقاء الله حتى إذا جاءتهم الساعة بغتة قالوا يا حسرتنا على ما فرطنا فيها وهم يحملون أوزارهم على ظهورهم ألا ساء ما يزرون
Lost indeed are they who treat it as a falsehood that they must meet Allah,- until on a sudden the hour is on them, and they say: "Ah! woe unto us that we took no thought of it"; for they bear their burdens on their backs, and evil indeed are the burdens that they bear?

وما الحياة الدنيا إلا لعب ولهو وللدار الآخرة خير للذين يتقون أفلا تعقلون
What is the life of this world but play and amusement? But best is the home in the hereafter, for those who are righteous. Will ye not then understand?

قد نعلم إنه ليحزنك الذي يقولون فإنهم لا يكذبونك ولكن الظالمين بآيات الله يجحدون
We know indeed the grief which their words do cause thee: It is not thee they reject: it is the signs of Allah, which the wicked contemn.

ولقد كذبت رسل من قبلك فصبروا على ما كذبوا وأوذوا حتى أتاهم نصرنا ولا مبدل لكلمات الله ولقد جاءك من نبإ المرسلين
Rejected were the messengers before thee: with patience and constancy they bore their rejection and their wrongs, until Our aid did reach them: there is none that can alter the words (and decrees) of Allah. Already hast thou received some account of those messengers.

وإن كان كبر عليك إعراضهم فإن استطعت أن تبتغي نفقا في الأرض أو سلما في السماء فتأتيهم بآية ولو شاء الله لجمعهم على الهدى فلا تكونن من الجاهلين
If their spurning is hard on thy mind, yet if thou wert able to seek a tunnel in the ground or a ladder to the skies and bring them a sign,- (what good?). If it were Allah's will, He could gather them together unto true guidance: so be not thou amongst those who are swayed by ignorance (and impatience)!

إنما يستجيب الذين يسمعون والموتى يبعثهم الله ثم إليه يرجعون
Those who listen (in truth), be sure, will accept: as to the dead, Allah will raise them up; then will they be turned unto Him.

وقالوا لولا نزل عليه آية من ربه قل إن الله قادر على أن ينزل آية ولكن أكثرهم لا يعلمون
They say: "Why is not a sign sent down to him from his Lord?" Say: "Allah hath certainly power to send down a sign: but most of them understand not.

وما من دابة في الأرض ولا طائر يطير بجناحيه إلا أمم أمثالكم ما فرطنا في الكتاب من شيء ثم إلى ربهم يحشرون
There is not an animal (that lives) on the earth, nor a being that flies on its wings, but (forms part of) communities like you. Nothing have we omitted from the Book, and they (all) shall be gathered to their Lord in the end.

والذين كذبوا بآياتنا صم وبكم في الظلمات من يشإ الله يضلله ومن يشأ يجعله على صراط مستقيم
Those who reject our signs are deaf and dumb,- in the midst of darkness profound: whom Allah willeth, He leaveth to wander: whom He willeth, He placeth on the way that is straight.

قل أرأيتكم إن أتاكم عذاب الله أو أتتكم الساعة أغير الله تدعون إن كنتم صادقين
Say: "Think ye to yourselves, if there come upon you the wrath of Allah, or the Hour (that ye dread), would ye then call upon other than Allah?- (reply) if ye are truthful!

بل إياه تدعون فيكشف ما تدعون إليه إن شاء وتنسون ما تشركون
"Nay,- On Him would ye call, and if it be His will, He would remove (the distress) which occasioned your call upon Him, and ye would forget (the false gods) which ye join with Him!"

ولقد أرسلنا إلى أمم من قبلك فأخذناهم بالبأساء والضراء لعلهم يتضرعون
Before thee We sent (messengers) to many nations, and We afflicted the nations with suffering and adversity, that they might learn humility.

فلولا إذ جاءهم بأسنا تضرعوا ولكن قست قلوبهم وزين لهم الشيطان ما كانوا يعملون
When the suffering reached them from us, why then did they not learn humility? On the contrary their hearts became hardened, and Satan made their (sinful) acts seem alluring to them.

فلما نسوا ما ذكروا به فتحنا عليهم أبواب كل شيء حتى إذا فرحوا بما أوتوا أخذناهم بغتة فإذا هم مبلسون
But when they forgot the warning they had received, We opened to them the gates of all (good) things, until, in the midst of their enjoyment of Our gifts, on a sudden, We called them to account, when lo! they were plunged in despair!

فقطع دابر القوم الذين ظلموا والحمد لله رب العالمين
Of the wrong-doers the last remnant was cut off. Praise be to Allah, the Cherisher of the worlds.

قل أرأيتم إن أخذ الله سمعكم وأبصاركم وختم على قلوبكم من إله غير الله يأتيكم به انظر كيف نصرف الآيات ثم هم يصدفون
Say: "Think ye, if Allah took away your hearing and your sight, and sealed up your hearts, who - a god other than Allah - could restore them to you?" See how We explain the signs by various (symbols); yet they turn aside.

قل أرأيتكم إن أتاكم عذاب الله بغتة أو جهرة هل يهلك إلا القوم الظالمون
Say: "Think ye, if the punishment of Allah comes to you, whether suddenly or openly, will any be destroyed except those who do wrong?

وما نرسل المرسلين إلا مبشرين ومنذرين فمن آمن وأصلح فلا خوف عليهم ولا هم يحزنون
We send the messengers only to give good news and to warn: so those who believe and mend (their lives),- upon them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.

والذين كذبوا بآياتنا يمسهم العذاب بما كانوا يفسقون
But those who reject our signs,- them shall punishment touch, for that they ceased not from transgressing.

قل لا أقول لكم عندي خزائن الله ولا أعلم الغيب ولا أقول لكم إني ملك إن أتبع إلا ما يوحى إلي قل هل يستوي الأعمى والبصير أفلا تتفكرون
Say: "I tell you not that with me are the treasures of Allah, nor do I know what is hidden, nor do I tell you I am an angel. I but follow what is revealed to me." Say: "can the blind be held equal to the seeing?" Will ye then consider not?

وأنذر به الذين يخافون أن يحشروا إلى ربهم ليس لهم من دونه ولي ولا شفيع لعلهم يتقون
Give this warning to those in whose (hearts) is the fear that they will be brought (to judgment) before their Lord: except for Him they will have no protector nor intercessor: that they may guard (against evil).

ولا تطرد الذين يدعون ربهم بالغداة والعشي يريدون وجهه ما عليك من حسابهم من شيء وما من حسابك عليهم من شيء فتطردهم فتكون من الظالمين
Send not away those who call on their Lord morning and evening, seeking His face. In naught art thou accountable for them, and in naught are they accountable for thee, that thou shouldst turn them away, and thus be (one) of the unjust.

وكذلك فتنا بعضهم ببعض ليقولوا أهؤلاء من الله عليهم من بيننا أليس الله بأعلم بالشاكرين
Thus did We try some of them by comparison with others, that they should say: "Is it these then that Allah hath favoured from amongst us?" Doth not Allah know best those who are grateful?

وإذا جاءك الذين يؤمنون بآياتنا فقل سلام عليكم كتب ربكم على نفسه الرحمة أنه من عمل منكم سوءا بجهالة ثم تاب من بعده وأصلح فأنه غفور رحيم
When those come to thee who believe in Our signs, Say: "Peace be on you: Your Lord hath inscribed for Himself (the rule of) mercy: verily, if any of you did evil in ignorance, and thereafter repented, and amend (his conduct), lo! He is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

وكذلك نفصل الآيات ولتستبين سبيل المجرمين
Thus do We explain the signs in detail: that the way of the sinners may be shown up.

قل إني نهيت أن أعبد الذين تدعون من دون الله قل لا أتبع أهواءكم قد ضللت إذا وما أنا من المهتدين
Say: "I am forbidden to worship those - others than Allah - whom ye call upon." Say: "I will not follow your wain desires: If I did, I would stray from the path, and be not of the company of those who receive guidance."

قل إني على بينة من ربي وكذبتم به ما عندي ما تستعجلون به إن الحكم إلا لله يقص الحق وهو خير الفاصلين
Say: "For me, I (work) on a clear sign from my Lord, but ye reject Him. What ye would see hastened, is not in my power. The command rests with none but Allah: He declares the truth, and He is the best of judges."

قل لو أن عندي ما تستعجلون به لقضي الأمر بيني وبينكم والله أعلم بالظالمين
Say: "If what ye would see hastened were in my power, the matter would be settled at once between you and me. But Allah knoweth best those who do wrong."

وعنده مفاتح الغيب لا يعلمها إلا هو ويعلم ما في البر والبحر وما تسقط من ورقة إلا يعلمها ولا حبة في ظلمات الأرض ولا رطب ولا يابس إلا في كتاب مبين
With Him are the keys of the unseen, the treasures that none knoweth but He. He knoweth whatever there is on the earth and in the sea. Not a leaf doth fall but with His knowledge: there is not a grain in the darkness (or depths) of the earth, nor anything fresh or dry (green or withered), but is (inscribed) in a record clear (to those who can read).

وهو الذي يتوفاكم بالليل ويعلم ما جرحتم بالنهار ثم يبعثكم فيه ليقضى أجل مسمى ثم إليه مرجعكم ثم ينبئكم بما كنتم تعملون
It is He who doth take your souls by night, and hath knowledge of all that ye have done by day: by day doth He raise you up again; that a term appointed be fulfilled; In the end unto Him will be your return; then will He show you the truth of all that ye did.

وهو القاهر فوق عباده ويرسل عليكم حفظة حتى إذا جاء أحدكم الموت توفته رسلنا وهم لا يفرطون
He is the irresistible, (watching) from above over His worshippers, and He sets guardians over you. At length, when death approaches one of you, Our angels take his soul, and they never fail in their duty.

ثم ردوا إلى الله مولاهم الحق ألا له الحكم وهو أسرع الحاسبين
Then are men returned unto Allah, their protector, the (only) reality: Is not His the command? and He is the swiftest in taking account.

قل من ينجيكم من ظلمات البر والبحر تدعونه تضرعا وخفية لئن أنجانا من هذه لنكونن من الشاكرين
Say: "Who is it that delivereth you from the dark recesses of land and sea, when ye call upon Him in humility and silent terror: 'If He only delivers us from these (dangers), (we vow) we shall truly show our gratitude'?"

قل الله ينجيكم منها ومن كل كرب ثم أنتم تشركون
Say "It is Allah that delivereth you from these and all (other) distresses: and yet ye worship false gods!"

قل هو القادر على أن يبعث عليكم عذابا من فوقكم أو من تحت أرجلكم أو يلبسكم شيعا ويذيق بعضكم بأس بعض انظر كيف نصرف الآيات لعلهم يفقهون
Say: "He hath power to send calamities on you, from above and below, or to cover you with confusion in party strife, giving you a taste of mutual vengeance - each from the other." See how We explain the signs by various (symbols); that they may understand.

وكذب به قومك وهو الحق قل لست عليكم بوكيل
But thy people reject this, though it is the truth. Say: "Not mine is the responsibility for arranging your affairs;

لكل نبإ مستقر وسوف تعلمون
For every message is a limit of time, and soon shall ye know it."

وإذا رأيت الذين يخوضون في آياتنا فأعرض عنهم حتى يخوضوا في حديث غيره وإما ينسينك الشيطان فلا تقعد بعد الذكرى مع القوم الظالمين
When thou seest men engaged in vain discourse about Our signs, turn away from them unless they turn to a different theme. If Satan ever makes thee forget, then after recollection, sit not thou in the company of those who do wrong.

وما على الذين يتقون من حسابهم من شيء ولكن ذكرى لعلهم يتقون
On their account no responsibility falls on the righteous, but (their duty) is to remind them, that they may (learn to) fear Allah.

وذر الذين اتخذوا دينهم لعبا ولهوا وغرتهم الحياة الدنيا وذكر به أن تبسل نفس بما كسبت ليس لها من دون الله ولي ولا شفيع وإن تعدل كل عدل لا يؤخذ منها أولئك الذين أبسلوا بما كسبوا لهم شراب من حميم وعذاب أليم بما كانوا يكفرون
Leave alone those who take their religion to be mere play and amusement, and are deceived by the life of this world. But proclaim (to them) this (truth): that every soul delivers itself to ruin by its own acts: it will find for itself no protector or intercessor except Allah: if it offered every ransom, (or reparation), none will be accepted: such is (the end of) those who deliver themselves to ruin by their own acts: they will have for drink (only) boiling water, and for punishment, one most grievous: for they persisted in rejecting Allah.

قل أندعو من دون الله ما لا ينفعنا ولا يضرنا ونرد على أعقابنا بعد إذ هدانا الله كالذي استهوته الشياطين في الأرض حيران له أصحاب يدعونه إلى الهدى ائتنا قل إن هدى الله هو الهدى وأمرنا لنسلم لرب العالمين
Say: "Shall we indeed call on others besides Allah,- things that can do us neither good nor harm,- and turn on our heels after receiving guidance from Allah? - like one whom the evil ones have made into a fool, wandering bewildered through the earth, his friends calling, come to us', (vainly) guiding him to the path." Say: "Allah's guidance is the (only) guidance, and we have been directed to submit ourselves to the Lord of the worlds;-

وأن أقيموا الصلاة واتقوه وهو الذي إليه تحشرون
"To establish regular prayers and to fear Allah: for it is to Him that we shall be gathered together."

وهو الذي خلق السماوات والأرض بالحق ويوم يقول كن فيكون قوله الحق وله الملك يوم ينفخ في الصور عالم الغيب والشهادة وهو الحكيم الخبير
It is He who created the heavens and the earth in true (proportions): the day He saith, "Be," behold! it is. His word is the truth. His will be the dominion the day the trumpet will be blown. He knoweth the unseen as well as that which is open. For He is the Wise, well acquainted (with all things).

وإذ قال إبراهيم لأبيه آزر أتتخذ أصناما آلهة إني أراك وقومك في ضلال مبين
Lo! Abraham said to his father Azar: "Takest thou idols for gods? For I see thee and thy people in manifest error."

وكذلك نري إبراهيم ملكوت السماوات والأرض وليكون من الموقنين
So also did We show Abraham the power and the laws of the heavens and the earth, that he might (with understanding) have certitude.

فلما جن عليه الليل رأى كوكبا قال هذا ربي فلما أفل قال لا أحب الآفلين
When the night covered him over, He saw a star: He said: "This is my Lord." But when it set, He said: "I love not those that set."

فلما رأى القمر بازغا قال هذا ربي فلما أفل قال لئن لم يهدني ربي لأكونن من القوم الضالين
When he saw the moon rising in splendour, he said: "This is my Lord." But when the moon set, He said: "unless my Lord guide me, I shall surely be among those who go astray."

فلما رأى الشمس بازغة قال هذا ربي هذا أكبر فلما أفلت قال يا قوم إني بريء مما تشركون
When he saw the sun rising in splendour, he said: "This is my Lord; this is the greatest (of all)." But when the sun set, he said: "O my people! I am indeed free from your (guilt) of giving partners to Allah.

إني وجهت وجهي للذي فطر السماوات والأرض حنيفا وما أنا من المشركين
"For me, I have set my face, firmly and truly, towards Him Who created the heavens and the earth, and never shall I give partners to Allah."

وحاجه قومه قال أتحاجوني في الله وقد هدان ولا أخاف ما تشركون به إلا أن يشاء ربي شيئا وسع ربي كل شيء علما أفلا تتذكرون
His people disputed with him. He said: "(Come) ye to dispute with me, about Allah, when He (Himself) hath guided me? I fear not (the beings) ye associate with Allah: Unless my Lord willeth, (nothing can happen). My Lord comprehendeth in His knowledge all things. Will ye not (yourselves) be admonished?

وكيف أخاف ما أشركتم ولا تخافون أنكم أشركتم بالله ما لم ينزل به عليكم سلطانا فأي الفريقين أحق بالأمن إن كنتم تعلمون
"How should I fear (the beings) ye associate with Allah, when ye fear not to give partners to Allah without any warrant having been given to you? Which of (us) two parties hath more right to security? (tell me) if ye know.

الذين آمنوا ولم يلبسوا إيمانهم بظلم أولئك لهم الأمن وهم مهتدون
"It is those who believe and confuse not their beliefs with wrong - that are (truly) in security, for they are on (right) guidance."

وتلك حجتنا آتيناها إبراهيم على قومه نرفع درجات من نشاء إن ربك حكيم عليم
That was the reasoning about Us, which We gave to Abraham (to use) against his people: We raise whom We will, degree after degree: for thy Lord is full of wisdom and knowledge.

ووهبنا له إسحاق ويعقوب كلا هدينا ونوحا هدينا من قبل ومن ذريته داوود وسليمان وأيوب ويوسف وموسى وهارون وكذلك نجزي المحسنين
We gave him Isaac and Jacob: all (three) guided: and before him, We guided Noah, and among his progeny, David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron: thus do We reward those who do good:

وزكريا ويحيى وعيسى وإلياس كل من الصالحين
And Zakariya and John, and Jesus and Elias: all in the ranks of the righteous:

وإسماعيل واليسع ويونس ولوطا وكلا فضلنا على العالمين
And Isma'il and Elisha, and Jonas, and Lot: and to all We gave favour above the nations:

ومن آبائهم وذرياتهم وإخوانهم واجتبيناهم وهديناهم إلى صراط مستقيم
(To them) and to their fathers, and progeny and brethren: We chose them, and we guided them to a straight way.

ذلك هدى الله يهدي به من يشاء من عباده ولو أشركوا لحبط عنهم ما كانوا يعملون
This is the guidance of Allah: He giveth that guidance to whom He pleaseth, of His worshippers. If they were to join other gods with Him, all that they did would be vain for them.

أولئك الذين آتيناهم الكتاب والحكم والنبوة فإن يكفر بها هؤلاء فقد وكلنا بها قوما ليسوا بها بكافرين
These were the men to whom We gave the Book, and authority, and prophethood: if these (their descendants) reject them, Behold! We shall entrust their charge to a new people who reject them not.

أولئك الذين هدى الله فبهداهم اقتده قل لا أسألكم عليه أجرا إن هو إلا ذكرى للعالمين
Those were the (prophets) who received Allah's guidance: Copy the guidance they received; Say: "No reward for this do I ask of you: This is no less than a message for the nations."

وما قدروا الله حق قدره إذ قالوا ما أنزل الله على بشر من شيء قل من أنزل الكتاب الذي جاء به موسى نورا وهدى للناس تجعلونه قراطيس تبدونها وتخفون كثيرا وعلمتم ما لم تعلموا أنتم ولا آباؤكم قل الله ثم ذرهم في خوضهم يلعبون
No just estimate of Allah do they make when they say: "Nothing doth Allah send down to man (by way of revelation)" Say: "Who then sent down the Book which Moses brought?- a light and guidance to man: But ye make it into (separate) sheets for show, while ye conceal much (of its contents): therein were ye taught that which ye knew not- neither ye nor your fathers." Say: "Allah (sent it down)": Then leave them to plunge in vain discourse and trifling.

وهذا كتاب أنزلناه مبارك مصدق الذي بين يديه ولتنذر أم القرى ومن حولها والذين يؤمنون بالآخرة يؤمنون به وهم على صلاتهم يحافظون
And this is a Book which We have sent down, bringing blessings, and confirming (the revelations) which came before it: that thou mayest warn the mother of cities and all around her. Those who believe in the Hereafter believe in this (Book), and they are constant in guarding their prayers.

ومن أظلم ممن افترى على الله كذبا أو قال أوحي إلي ولم يوح إليه شيء ومن قال سأنزل مثل ما أنزل الله ولو ترى إذ الظالمون في غمرات الموت والملائكة باسطو أيديهم أخرجوا أنفسكم اليوم تجزون عذاب الهون بما كنتم تقولون على الله غير الحق وكنتم عن آياته تستكبرون
Who can be more wicked than one who inventeth a lie against Allah, or saith, "I have received inspiration," when he hath received none, or (again) who saith, "I can reveal the like of what Allah hath revealed"? If thou couldst but see how the wicked (do fare) in the flood of confusion at death! - the angels stretch forth their hands, (saying),"Yield up your souls: this day shall ye receive your reward,- a penalty of shame, for that ye used to tell lies against Allah, and scornfully to reject of His signs!"

ولقد جئتمونا فرادى كما خلقناكم أول مرة وتركتم ما خولناكم وراء ظهوركم وما نرى معكم شفعاءكم الذين زعمتم أنهم فيكم شركاء لقد تقطع بينكم وضل عنكم ما كنتم تزعمون
"And behold! ye come to us bare and alone as We created you for the first time: ye have left behind you all (the favours) which We bestowed on you: We see not with you your intercessors whom ye thought to be partners in your affairs: so now all relations between you have been cut off, and your (pet) fancies have left you in the lurch!"

إن الله فالق الحب والنوى يخرج الحي من الميت ومخرج الميت من الحي ذلكم الله فأنى تؤفكون
It is Allah Who causeth the seed-grain and the date-stone to split and sprout. He causeth the living to issue from the dead, and He is the one to cause the dead to issue from the living. That is Allah: then how are ye deluded away from the truth?

فالق الإصباح وجعل الليل سكنا والشمس والقمر حسبانا ذلك تقدير العزيز العليم
He it is that cleaveth the day-break (from the dark): He makes the night for rest and tranquillity, and the sun and moon for the reckoning (of time): Such is the judgment and ordering of (Him), the Exalted in Power, the Omniscient.

وهو الذي جعل لكم النجوم لتهتدوا بها في ظلمات البر والبحر قد فصلنا الآيات لقوم يعلمون
It is He Who maketh the stars (as beacons) for you, that ye may guide yourselves, with their help, through the dark spaces of land and sea: We detail Our signs for people who know.

وهو الذي أنشأكم من نفس واحدة فمستقر ومستودع قد فصلنا الآيات لقوم يفقهون
It is He Who hath produced you from a single person: here is a place of sojourn and a place of departure: We detail Our signs for people who understand.

وهو الذي أنزل من السماء ماء فأخرجنا به نبات كل شيء فأخرجنا منه خضرا نخرج منه حبا متراكبا ومن النخل من طلعها قنوان دانية وجنات من أعناب والزيتون والرمان مشتبها وغير متشابه انظروا إلى ثمره إذا أثمر وينعه إن في ذلكم لآيات لقوم يؤمنون
It is He Who sendeth down rain from the skies: with it We produce vegetation of all kinds: from some We produce green (crops), out of which We produce grain, heaped up (at harvest); out of the date-palm and its sheaths (or spathes) (come) clusters of dates hanging low and near: and (then there are) gardens of grapes, and olives, and pomegranates, each similar (in kind) yet different (in variety): when they begin to bear fruit, feast your eyes with the fruit and the ripeness thereof. Behold! in these things there are signs for people who believe.

وجعلوا لله شركاء الجن وخلقهم وخرقوا له بنين وبنات بغير علم سبحانه وتعالى عما يصفون
Yet they make the Jinns equals with Allah, though Allah did create the Jinns; and they falsely, having no knowledge, attribute to Him sons and daughters. Praise and glory be to Him! (for He is) above what they attribute to Him!

بديع السماوات والأرض أنى يكون له ولد ولم تكن له صاحبة وخلق كل شيء وهو بكل شيء عليم
To Him is due the primal origin of the heavens and the earth: How can He have a son when He hath no consort? He created all things, and He hath full knowledge of all things.

ذلكم الله ربكم لا إله إلا هو خالق كل شيء فاعبدوه وهو على كل شيء وكيل
That is Allah, your Lord! there is no god but He, the Creator of all things: then worship ye Him: and He hath power to dispose of all affairs.

لا تدركه الأبصار وهو يدرك الأبصار وهو اللطيف الخبير
No vision can grasp Him, but His grasp is over all vision: He is above all comprehension, yet is acquainted with all things.

قد جاءكم بصائر من ربكم فمن أبصر فلنفسه ومن عمي فعليها وما أنا عليكم بحفيظ
"Now have come to you, from your Lord, proofs (to open your eyes): if any will see, it will be for (the good of) his own soul; if any will be blind, it will be to his own (harm): I am not (here) to watch over your doings."

وكذلك نصرف الآيات وليقولوا درست ولنبينه لقوم يعلمون
Thus do we explain the signs by various (symbols): that they may say, "Thou hast taught (us) diligently," and that We may make the matter clear to those who know.

اتبع ما أوحي إليك من ربك لا إله إلا هو وأعرض عن المشركين
Follow what thou art taught by inspiration from thy Lord: there is no god but He: and turn aside from those who join gods with Allah.

ولو شاء الله ما أشركوا وما جعلناك عليهم حفيظا وما أنت عليهم بوكيل
If it had been Allah's plan, they would not have taken false gods: but We made thee not one to watch over their doings, nor art thou set over them to dispose of their affairs.

ولا تسبوا الذين يدعون من دون الله فيسبوا الله عدوا بغير علم كذلك زينا لكل أمة عملهم ثم إلى ربهم مرجعهم فينبئهم بما كانوا يعملون
Revile not ye those whom they call upon besides Allah, lest they out of spite revile Allah in their ignorance. Thus have We made alluring to each people its own doings. In the end will they return to their Lord, and We shall then tell them the truth of all that they did.

وأقسموا بالله جهد أيمانهم لئن جاءتهم آية ليؤمنن بها قل إنما الآيات عند الله وما يشعركم أنها إذا جاءت لا يؤمنون
They swear their strongest oaths by Allah, that if a (special) sign came to them, by it they would believe. Say: "Certainly (all) signs are in the power of Allah: but what will make you (Muslims) realise that (even) if (special) signs came, they will not believe."?

ونقلب أفئدتهم وأبصارهم كما لم يؤمنوا به أول مرة ونذرهم في طغيانهم يعمهون
We (too) shall turn to (confusion) their hearts and their eyes, even as they refused to believe in this in the first instance: We shall leave them in their trespasses, to wander in distraction.

ولو أننا نزلنا إليهم الملائكة وكلمهم الموتى وحشرنا عليهم كل شيء قبلا ما كانوا ليؤمنوا إلا أن يشاء الله ولكن أكثرهم يجهلون
Even if We did send unto them angels, and the dead did speak unto them, and We gathered together all things before their very eyes, they are not the ones to believe, unless it is in Allah's plan. But most of them ignore (the truth).

وكذلك جعلنا لكل نبي عدوا شياطين الإنس والجن يوحي بعضهم إلى بعض زخرف القول غرورا ولو شاء ربك ما فعلوه فذرهم وما يفترون
Likewise did We make for every Messenger an enemy,- evil ones among men and jinns, inspiring each other with flowery discourses by way of deception. If thy Lord had so planned, they would not have done it: so leave them and their inventions alone.

ولتصغى إليه أفئدة الذين لا يؤمنون بالآخرة وليرضوه وليقترفوا ما هم مقترفون
To such (deceit) let the hearts of those incline, who have no faith in the hereafter: let them delight in it, and let them earn from it what they may.

أفغير الله أبتغي حكما وهو الذي أنزل إليكم الكتاب مفصلا والذين آتيناهم الكتاب يعلمون أنه منزل من ربك بالحق فلا تكونن من الممترين
Say: "Shall I seek for judge other than Allah? - when He it is Who hath sent unto you the Book, explained in detail." They know full well, to whom We have given the Book, that it hath been sent down from thy Lord in truth. Never be then of those who doubt.

وتمت كلمت ربك صدقا وعدلا لا مبدل لكلماته وهو السميع العليم
The word of thy Lord doth find its fulfilment in truth and in justice: None can change His words: for He is the one who heareth and knoweth all.

وإن تطع أكثر من في الأرض يضلوك عن سبيل الله إن يتبعون إلا الظن وإن هم إلا يخرصون
Wert thou to follow the common run of those on earth, they will lead thee away from the way of Allah. They follow nothing but conjecture: they do nothing but lie.

إن ربك هو أعلم من يضل عن سبيله وهو أعلم بالمهتدين
Thy Lord knoweth best who strayeth from His way: He knoweth best who they are that receive His guidance.

فكلوا مما ذكر اسم الله عليه إن كنتم بآياته مؤمنين
So eat of (meats) on which Allah's name hath been pronounced, if ye have faith in His signs.

وما لكم ألا تأكلوا مما ذكر اسم الله عليه وقد فصل لكم ما حرم عليكم إلا ما اضطررتم إليه وإن كثيرا ليضلون بأهوائهم بغير علم إن ربك هو أعلم بالمعتدين
Why should ye not eat of (meats) on which Allah's name hath been pronounced, when He hath explained to you in detail what is forbidden to you - except under compulsion of necessity? But many do mislead (men) by their appetites unchecked by knowledge. Thy Lord knoweth best those who transgress.

وذروا ظاهر الإثم وباطنه إن الذين يكسبون الإثم سيجزون بما كانوا يقترفون
Eschew all sin, open or secret: those who earn sin will get due recompense for their "earnings."

ولا تأكلوا مما لم يذكر اسم الله عليه وإنه لفسق وإن الشياطين ليوحون إلى أوليائهم ليجادلوكم وإن أطعتموهم إنكم لمشركون
Eat not of (meats) on which Allah's name hath not been pronounced: That would be impiety. But the evil ones ever inspire their friends to contend with you if ye were to obey them, ye would indeed be Pagans.

أومن كان ميتا فأحييناه وجعلنا له نورا يمشي به في الناس كمن مثله في الظلمات ليس بخارج منها كذلك زين للكافرين ما كانوا يعملون
Can he who was dead, to whom We gave life, and a light whereby he can walk amongst men, be like him who is in the depths of darkness, from which he can never come out? Thus to those without faith their own deeds seem pleasing.

وكذلك جعلنا في كل قرية أكابر مجرميها ليمكروا فيها وما يمكرون إلا بأنفسهم وما يشعرون
Thus have We placed leaders in every town, its wicked men, to plot (and burrow) therein: but they only plot against their own souls, and they perceive it not.

وإذا جاءتهم آية قالوا لن نؤمن حتى نؤتى مثل ما أوتي رسل الله الله أعلم حيث يجعل رسالته سيصيب الذين أجرموا صغار عند الله وعذاب شديد بما كانوا يمكرون
When there comes to them a sign (from Allah), They say: "We shall not believe until we receive one (exactly) like those received by Allah's messengers." Allah knoweth best where (and how) to carry out His mission. Soon will the wicked be overtaken by humiliation before Allah, and a severe punishment, for all their plots.

فمن يرد الله أن يهديه يشرح صدره للإسلام ومن يرد أن يضله يجعل صدره ضيقا حرجا كأنما يصعد في السماء كذلك يجعل الله الرجس على الذين لا يؤمنون
Those whom Allah (in His plan) willeth to guide,- He openeth their breast to Islam; those whom He willeth to leave straying,- He maketh their breast close and constricted, as if they had to climb up to the skies: thus doth Allah (heap) the penalty on those who refuse to believe.

وهذا صراط ربك مستقيما قد فصلنا الآيات لقوم يذكرون
This is the way of thy Lord, leading straight: We have detailed the signs for those who receive admonition.

لهم دار السلام عند ربهم وهو وليهم بما كانوا يعملون
For them will be a home of peace in the presence of their Lord: He will be their friend, because they practised (righteousness).

ويوم يحشرهم جميعا يا معشر الجن قد استكثرتم من الإنس وقال أولياؤهم من الإنس ربنا استمتع بعضنا ببعض وبلغنا أجلنا الذي أجلت لنا قال النار مثواكم خالدين فيها إلا ما شاء الله إن ربك حكيم عليم
One day will He gather them all together, (and say): "O ye assembly of Jinns! Much (toll) did ye take of men." Their friends amongst men will say: "Our Lord! we made profit from each other: but (alas!) we reached our term - which thou didst appoint for us." He will say: "The Fire be your dwelling-place: you will dwell therein for ever, except as Allah willeth." for thy Lord is full of wisdom and knowledge.

وكذلك نولي بعض الظالمين بعضا بما كانوا يكسبون
Thus do we make the wrong-doers turn to each other, because of what they earn.

يا معشر الجن والإنس ألم يأتكم رسل منكم يقصون عليكم آياتي وينذرونكم لقاء يومكم هذا قالوا شهدنا على أنفسنا وغرتهم الحياة الدنيا وشهدوا على أنفسهم أنهم كانوا كافرين
"O ye assembly of Jinns and men! came there not unto you messengers from amongst you, setting forth unto you My signs, and warning you of the meeting of this Day of yours?" They will say: "We bear witness against ourselves." It was the life of this world that deceived them. So against themselves will they bear witness that they rejected Faith.

ذلك أن لم يكن ربك مهلك القرى بظلم وأهلها غافلون
(The messengers were sent) thus, for thy Lord would not destroy for their wrong-doing men's habitations whilst their occupants were unwarned.

ولكل درجات مما عملوا وما ربك بغافل عما يعملون
To all are degrees (or ranks) according to their deeds: for thy Lord is not unmindful of anything that they do.

وربك الغني ذو الرحمة إن يشأ يذهبكم ويستخلف من بعدكم ما يشاء كما أنشأكم من ذرية قوم آخرين
Thy Lord is self-sufficient, full of Mercy: if it were His will, He could destroy you, and in your place appoint whom He will as your successors, even as He raised you up from the posterity of other people.

إن ما توعدون لآت وما أنتم بمعجزين
All that hath been promised unto you will come to pass: nor can ye frustrate it (in the least bit).

قل يا قوم اعملوا على مكانتكم إني عامل فسوف تعلمون من تكون له عاقبة الدار إنه لا يفلح الظالمون
Say: "O my people! Do whatever ye can: I will do (my part): soon will ye know who it is whose end will be (best) in the Hereafter: certain it is that the wrong-doers will not prosper."

وجعلوا لله مما ذرأ من الحرث والأنعام نصيبا فقالوا هذا لله بزعمهم وهذا لشركائنا فما كان لشركائهم فلا يصل إلى الله وما كان لله فهو يصل إلى شركائهم ساء ما يحكمون
Out of what Allah hath produced in abundance in tilth and in cattle, they assigned Him a share: they say, according to their fancies: "This is for Allah, and this" - for our "partners"! but the share of their" partners "reacheth not Allah, whilst the share of Allah reacheth their "partners"! evil (and unjust) is their assignment!

وكذلك زين لكثير من المشركين قتل أولادهم شركاؤهم ليردوهم وليلبسوا عليهم دينهم ولو شاء الله ما فعلوه فذرهم وما يفترون
Even so, in the eyes of most of the pagans, their "partners" made alluring the slaughter of their children, in order to lead them to their own destruction, and cause confusion in their religion. If Allah had willed, they would not have done so: But leave alone them and their inventions.

وقالوا هذه أنعام وحرث حجر لا يطعمها إلا من نشاء بزعمهم وأنعام حرمت ظهورها وأنعام لا يذكرون اسم الله عليها افتراء عليه سيجزيهم بما كانوا يفترون
And they say that such and such cattle and crops are taboo, and none should eat of them except those whom - so they say - We wish; further, there are cattle forbidden to yoke or burden, and cattle on which, (at slaughter), the name of Allah is not pronounced; - inventions against Allah's name: soon will He requite them for their inventions.

وقالوا ما في بطون هذه الأنعام خالصة لذكورنا ومحرم على أزواجنا وإن يكن ميتة فهم فيه شركاء سيجزيهم وصفهم إنه حكيم عليم
They say: "What is in the wombs of such and such cattle is specially reserved (for food) for our men, and forbidden to our women; but if it is still-born, then all have share therein. For their (false) attribution (of superstitions to Allah), He will soon punish them: for He is full of wisdom and knowledge.

قد خسر الذين قتلوا أولادهم سفها بغير علم وحرموا ما رزقهم الله افتراء على الله قد ضلوا وما كانوا مهتدين
Lost are those who slay their children, from folly, without knowledge, and forbid food which Allah hath provided for them, inventing (lies) against Allah. They have indeed gone astray and heeded no guidance.

وهو الذي أنشأ جنات معروشات وغير معروشات والنخل والزرع مختلفا أكله والزيتون والرمان متشابها وغير متشابه كلوا من ثمره إذا أثمر وآتوا حقه يوم حصاده ولا تسرفوا إنه لا يحب المسرفين
It is He Who produceth gardens, with trellises and without, and dates, and tilth with produce of all kinds, and olives and pomegranates, similar (in kind) and different (in variety): eat of their fruit in their season, but render the dues that are proper on the day that the harvest is gathered. But waste not by excess: for Allah loveth not the wasters.

ومن الأنعام حمولة وفرشا كلوا مما رزقكم الله ولا تتبعوا خطوات الشيطان إنه لكم عدو مبين
Of the cattle are some for burden and some for meat: eat what Allah hath provided for you, and follow not the footsteps of Satan: for he is to you and avowed enemy.

ثمانية أزواج من الضأن اثنين ومن المعز اثنين قل آلذكرين حرم أم الأنثيين أما اشتملت عليه أرحام الأنثيين نبئوني بعلم إن كنتم صادقين
(Take) eight (head of cattle) in (four) pairs: of sheep a pair, and of goats a pair; say, hath He forbidden the two males, or the two females, or (the young) which the wombs of the two females enclose? Tell me with knowledge if ye are truthful:

ومن الإبل اثنين ومن البقر اثنين قل آلذكرين حرم أم الأنثيين أما اشتملت عليه أرحام الأنثيين أم كنتم شهداء إذ وصاكم الله بهذا فمن أظلم ممن افترى على الله كذبا ليضل الناس بغير علم إن الله لا يهدي القوم الظالمين
Of camels a pair, and oxen a pair; say, hath He forbidden the two males, or the two females, or (the young) which the wombs of the two females enclose? - Were ye present when Allah ordered you such a thing? But who doth more wrong than one who invents a lie against Allah, to lead astray men without knowledge? For Allah guideth not people who do wrong.

قل لا أجد في ما أوحي إلي محرما على طاعم يطعمه إلا أن يكون ميتة أو دما مسفوحا أو لحم خنزير فإنه رجس أو فسقا أهل لغير الله به فمن اضطر غير باغ ولا عاد فإن ربك غفور رحيم
Say: "I find not in the message received by me by inspiration any (meat) forbidden to be eaten by one who wishes to eat it, unless it be dead meat, or blood poured forth, or the flesh of swine,- for it is an abomination - or, what is impious, (meat) on which a name has been invoked, other than Allah's". But (even so), if a person is forced by necessity, without wilful disobedience, nor transgressing due limits,- thy Lord is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

وعلى الذين هادوا حرمنا كل ذي ظفر ومن البقر والغنم حرمنا عليهم شحومهما إلا ما حملت ظهورهما أو الحوايا أو ما اختلط بعظم ذلك جزيناهم ببغيهم وإنا لصادقون
For those who followed the Jewish Law, We forbade every (animal) with undivided hoof, and We forbade them that fat of the ox and the sheep, except what adheres to their backs or their entrails, or is mixed up with a bone: this in recompense for their wilful disobedience: for We are true (in Our ordinances).

فإن كذبوك فقل ربكم ذو رحمة واسعة ولا يرد بأسه عن القوم المجرمين
If they accuse thee of falsehood, say: "Your Lord is full of mercy all-embracing; but from people in guilt never will His wrath be turned back.

سيقول الذين أشركوا لو شاء الله ما أشركنا ولا آباؤنا ولا حرمنا من شيء كذلك كذب الذين من قبلهم حتى ذاقوا بأسنا قل هل عندكم من علم فتخرجوه لنا إن تتبعون إلا الظن وإن أنتم إلا تخرصون
Those who give partners (to Allah) will say: "If Allah had wished, we should not have given partners to Him nor would our fathers; nor should we have had any taboos." So did their ancestors argue falsely, until they tasted of Our wrath. Say: "Have ye any (certain) knowledge? If so, produce it before us. Ye follow nothing but conjecture: ye do nothing but lie."

قل فلله الحجة البالغة فلو شاء لهداكم أجمعين
Say: "With Allah is the argument that reaches home: if it had been His will, He could indeed have guided you all."

قل هلم شهداءكم الذين يشهدون أن الله حرم هذا فإن شهدوا فلا تشهد معهم ولا تتبع أهواء الذين كذبوا بآياتنا والذين لا يؤمنون بالآخرة وهم بربهم يعدلون
Say: "Bring forward your witnesses to prove that Allah did forbid so and so." If they bring such witnesses, be not thou amongst them: Nor follow thou the vain desires of such as treat our signs as falsehoods, and such as believe not in the Hereafter: for they hold others as equal with their Guardian-Lord.

قل تعالوا أتل ما حرم ربكم عليكم ألا تشركوا به شيئا وبالوالدين إحسانا ولا تقتلوا أولادكم من إملاق نحن نرزقكم وإياهم ولا تقربوا الفواحش ما ظهر منها وما بطن ولا تقتلوا النفس التي حرم الله إلا بالحق ذلكم وصاكم به لعلكم تعقلون
Say: "Come, I will rehearse what Allah hath (really) prohibited you from": Join not anything as equal with Him; be good to your parents; kill not your children on a plea of want;- We provide sustenance for you and for them;- come not nigh to shameful deeds. Whether open or secret; take not life, which Allah hath made sacred, except by way of justice and law: thus doth He command you, that ye may learn wisdom.

ولا تقربوا مال اليتيم إلا بالتي هي أحسن حتى يبلغ أشده وأوفوا الكيل والميزان بالقسط لا نكلف نفسا إلا وسعها وإذا قلتم فاعدلوا ولو كان ذا قربى وبعهد الله أوفوا ذلكم وصاكم به لعلكم تذكرون
And come not nigh to the orphan's property, except to improve it, until he attain the age of full strength; give measure and weight with (full) justice;- no burden do We place on any soul, but that which it can bear;- whenever ye speak, speak justly, even if a near relative is concerned; and fulfil the covenant of Allah: thus doth He command you, that ye may remember.

وأن هذا صراطي مستقيما فاتبعوه ولا تتبعوا السبل فتفرق بكم عن سبيله ذلكم وصاكم به لعلكم تتقون
Verily, this is My way, leading straight: follow it: follow not (other) paths: they will scatter you about from His (great) path: thus doth He command you. that ye may be righteous.

ثم آتينا موسى الكتاب تماما على الذي أحسن وتفصيلا لكل شيء وهدى ورحمة لعلهم بلقاء ربهم يؤمنون
Moreover, We gave Moses the Book, completing (Our favour) to those who would do right, and explaining all things in detail,- and a guide and a mercy, that they might believe in the meeting with their Lord.

وهذا كتاب أنزلناه مبارك فاتبعوه واتقوا لعلكم ترحمون
And this is a Book which We have revealed as a blessing: so follow it and be righteous, that ye may receive mercy:

أن تقولوا إنما أنزل الكتاب على طائفتين من قبلنا وإن كنا عن دراستهم لغافلين
Lest ye should say: "The Book was sent down to two Peoples before us, and for our part, we remained unacquainted with all that they learned by assiduous study:"

أو تقولوا لو أنا أنزل علينا الكتاب لكنا أهدى منهم فقد جاءكم بينة من ربكم وهدى ورحمة فمن أظلم ممن كذب بآيات الله وصدف عنها سنجزي الذين يصدفون عن آياتنا سوء العذاب بما كانوا يصدفون
Or lest ye should say: "If the Book had only been sent down to us, we should have followed its guidance better than they." Now then hath come unto you a clear (sign) from your Lord,- and a guide and a mercy: then who could do more wrong than one who rejecteth Allah's signs, and turneth away therefrom? In good time shall We requite those who turn away from Our signs, with a dreadful penalty, for their turning away.

هل ينظرون إلا أن تأتيهم الملائكة أو يأتي ربك أو يأتي بعض آيات ربك يوم يأتي بعض آيات ربك لا ينفع نفسا إيمانها لم تكن آمنت من قبل أو كسبت في إيمانها خيرا قل انتظروا إنا منتظرون
Are they waiting to see if the angels come to them, or thy Lord (Himself), or certain of the signs of thy Lord! the day that certain of the signs of thy Lord do come, no good will it do to a soul to believe in them then if it believed not before nor earned righteousness through its faith. Say: "Wait ye: we too are waiting."

إن الذين فرقوا دينهم وكانوا شيعا لست منهم في شيء إنما أمرهم إلى الله ثم ينبئهم بما كانوا يفعلون
As for those who divide their religion and break up into sects, thou hast no part in them in the least: their affair is with Allah: He will in the end tell them the truth of all that they did.

من جاء بالحسنة فله عشر أمثالها ومن جاء بالسيئة فلا يجزى إلا مثلها وهم لا يظلمون
He that doeth good shall have ten times as much to his credit: He that doeth evil shall only be recompensed according to his evil: no wrong shall be done unto (any of) them.

قل إنني هداني ربي إلى صراط مستقيم دينا قيما ملة إبراهيم حنيفا وما كان من المشركين
Say: "Verily, my Lord hath guided me to a way that is straight,- a religion of right,- the path (trod) by Abraham the true in Faith, and he (certainly) joined not gods with Allah."

قل إن صلاتي ونسكي ومحياي ومماتي لله رب العالمين
Say: "Truly, my prayer and my service of sacrifice, my life and my death, are (all) for Allah, the Cherisher of the Worlds:

لا شريك له وبذلك أمرت وأنا أول المسلمين
No partner hath He: this am I commanded, and I am the first of those who bow to His will.

قل أغير الله أبغي ربا وهو رب كل شيء ولا تكسب كل نفس إلا عليها ولا تزر وازرة وزر أخرى ثم إلى ربكم مرجعكم فينبئكم بما كنتم فيه تختلفون
Say: "Shall I seek for (my) Cherisher other than Allah, when He is the Cherisher of all things (that exist)? Every soul draws the meed of its acts on none but itself: no bearer of burdens can bear the burden of another. Your goal in the end is towards Allah: He will tell you the truth of the things wherein ye disputed."

وهو الذي جعلكم خلائف الأرض ورفع بعضكم فوق بعض درجات ليبلوكم في ما آتاكم إن ربك سريع العقاب وإنه لغفور رحيم
It is He Who hath made you (His) agents, inheritors of the earth: He hath raised you in ranks, some above others: that He may try you in the gifts He hath given you: for thy Lord is quick in punishment: yet He is indeed Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم المص
Alif, Lam, Mim, Sad.

كتاب أنزل إليك فلا يكن في صدرك حرج منه لتنذر به وذكرى للمؤمنين
A Book revealed unto thee,- So let thy heart be oppressed no more by any difficulty on that account,- that with it thou mightest warn (the erring) and teach the Believers).

اتبعوا ما أنزل إليكم من ربكم ولا تتبعوا من دونه أولياء قليلا ما تذكرون
Follow (O men!) the revelation given unto you from your Lord, and follow not, as friends or protectors, other than Him. Little it is ye remember of admonition.

وكم من قرية أهلكناها فجاءها بأسنا بياتا أو هم قائلون
How many towns have We destroyed (for their sins)? Our punishment took them on a sudden by night or while they slept for their afternoon rest.

فما كان دعواهم إذ جاءهم بأسنا إلا أن قالوا إنا كنا ظالمين
When (thus) Our punishment took them, no cry did they utter but this: "Indeed we did wrong."

فلنسألن الذين أرسل إليهم ولنسألن المرسلين
Then shall we question those to whom Our message was sent and those by whom We sent it.

فلنقصن عليهم بعلم وما كنا غائبين
And verily, We shall recount their whole story with knowledge, for We were never absent (at any time or place).

والوزن يومئذ الحق فمن ثقلت موازينه فأولئك هم المفلحون
The balance that day will be true (to nicety): those whose scale (of good) will be heavy, will prosper:

ومن خفت موازينه فأولئك الذين خسروا أنفسهم بما كانوا بآياتنا يظلمون
Those whose scale will be light, will be their souls in perdition, for that they wrongfully treated Our signs.

ولقد مكناكم في الأرض وجعلنا لكم فيها معايش قليلا ما تشكرون
It is We Who have placed you with authority on earth, and provided you therein with means for the fulfilment of your life: small are the thanks that ye give!

ولقد خلقناكم ثم صورناكم ثم قلنا للملائكة اسجدوا لآدم فسجدوا إلا إبليس لم يكن من الساجدين
It is We Who created you and gave you shape; then We bade the angels prostrate to Adam, and they prostrate; not so Iblis; He refused to be of those who prostrate.

قال ما منعك ألا تسجد إذ أمرتك قال أنا خير منه خلقتني من نار وخلقته من طين
(Allah) said: "What prevented thee from prostrating when I commanded thee?" He said: "I am better than he: Thou didst create me from fire, and him from clay."

قال فاهبط منها فما يكون لك أن تتكبر فيها فاخرج إنك من الصاغرين
(Allah) said: "Get thee down from this: it is not for thee to be arrogant here: get out, for thou art of the meanest (of creatures)."

قال أنظرني إلى يوم يبعثون
He said: "Give me respite till the day they are raised up."

قال إنك من المنظرين
(Allah) said: "Be thou among those who have respite."

قال فبما أغويتني لأقعدن لهم صراطك المستقيم
He said: "Because thou hast thrown me out of the way, lo! I will lie in wait for them on thy straight way:

ثم لآتينهم من بين أيديهم ومن خلفهم وعن أيمانهم وعن شمائلهم ولا تجد أكثرهم شاكرين
"Then will I assault them from before them and behind them, from their right and their left: Nor wilt thou find, in most of them, gratitude (for thy mercies)."

قال اخرج منها مذءوما مدحورا لمن تبعك منهم لأملأن جهنم منكم أجمعين
(Allah) said: "Get out from this, disgraced and expelled. If any of them follow thee,- Hell will I fill with you all.

ويا آدم اسكن أنت وزوجك الجنة فكلا من حيث شئتما ولا تقربا هذه الشجرة فتكونا من الظالمين
"O Adam! dwell thou and thy wife in the Garden, and enjoy (its good things) as ye wish: but approach not this tree, or ye run into harm and transgression."

فوسوس لهما الشيطان ليبدي لهما ما ووري عنهما من سوآتهما وقال ما نهاكما ربكما عن هذه الشجرة إلا أن تكونا ملكين أو تكونا من الخالدين
Then began Satan to whisper suggestions to them, bringing openly before their minds all their shame that was hidden from them (before): he said: "Your Lord only forbade you this tree, lest ye should become angels or such beings as live for ever."

وقاسمهما إني لكما لمن الناصحين
And he swore to them both, that he was their sincere adviser.

فدلاهما بغرور فلما ذاقا الشجرة بدت لهما سوآتهما وطفقا يخصفان عليهما من ورق الجنة وناداهما ربهما ألم أنهكما عن تلكما الشجرة وأقل لكما إن الشيطان لكما عدو مبين
So by deceit he brought about their fall: when they tasted of the tree, their shame became manifest to them, and they began to sew together the leaves of the garden over their bodies. And their Lord called unto them: "Did I not forbid you that tree, and tell you that Satan was an avowed enemy unto you?"

قالا ربنا ظلمنا أنفسنا وإن لم تغفر لنا وترحمنا لنكونن من الخاسرين
They said: "Our Lord! We have wronged our own souls: If thou forgive us not and bestow not upon us Thy Mercy, we shall certainly be lost."

قال اهبطوا بعضكم لبعض عدو ولكم في الأرض مستقر ومتاع إلى حين
(Allah) said: "Get ye down. With enmity between yourselves. On earth will be your dwelling-place and your means of livelihood,- for a time."

قال فيها تحيون وفيها تموتون ومنها تخرجون
He said: "Therein shall ye live, and therein shall ye die; but from it shall ye be taken out (at last)."

يا بني آدم قد أنزلنا عليكم لباسا يواري سوآتكم وريشا ولباس التقوى ذلك خير ذلك من آيات الله لعلهم يذكرون
O ye Children of Adam! We have bestowed raiment upon you to cover your shame, as well as to be an adornment to you. But the raiment of righteousness,- that is the best. Such are among the Signs of Allah, that they may receive admonition!

يا بني آدم لا يفتننكم الشيطان كما أخرج أبويكم من الجنة ينزع عنهما لباسهما ليريهما سوآتهما إنه يراكم هو وقبيله من حيث لا ترونهم إنا جعلنا الشياطين أولياء للذين لا يؤمنون
O ye Children of Adam! Let not Satan seduce you, in the same manner as He got your parents out of the Garden, stripping them of their raiment, to expose their shame: for he and his tribe watch you from a position where ye cannot see them: We made the evil ones friends (only) to those without faith.

وإذا فعلوا فاحشة قالوا وجدنا عليها آباءنا والله أمرنا بها قل إن الله لا يأمر بالفحشاء أتقولون على الله ما لا تعلمون
When they do aught that is shameful, they say: "We found our fathers doing so"; and "Allah commanded us thus": Say: "Nay, Allah never commands what is shameful: do ye say of Allah what ye know not?"

قل أمر ربي بالقسط وأقيموا وجوهكم عند كل مسجد وادعوه مخلصين له الدين كما بدأكم تعودون
Say: "My Lord hath commanded justice; and that ye set your whole selves (to Him) at every time and place of prayer, and call upon Him, making your devotion sincere as in His sight: such as He created you in the beginning, so shall ye return."

فريقا هدى وفريقا حق عليهم الضلالة إنهم اتخذوا الشياطين أولياء من دون الله ويحسبون أنهم مهتدون
Some He hath guided: Others have (by their choice) deserved the loss of their way; in that they took the evil ones, in preference to Allah, for their friends and protectors, and think that they receive guidance.

يا بني آدم خذوا زينتكم عند كل مسجد وكلوا واشربوا ولا تسرفوا إنه لا يحب المسرفين
O Children of Adam! wear your beautiful apparel at every time and place of prayer: eat and drink: But waste not by excess, for Allah loveth not the wasters.

قل من حرم زينة الله التي أخرج لعباده والطيبات من الرزق قل هي للذين آمنوا في الحياة الدنيا خالصة يوم القيامة كذلك نفصل الآيات لقوم يعلمون
Say: Who hath forbidden the beautiful (gifts) of Allah, which He hath produced for His servants, and the things, clean and pure, (which He hath provided) for sustenance? Say: They are, in the life of this world, for those who believe, (and) purely for them on the Day of Judgment. Thus do We explain the signs in detail for those who understand.

قل إنما حرم ربي الفواحش ما ظهر منها وما بطن والإثم والبغي بغير الحق وأن تشركوا بالله ما لم ينزل به سلطانا وأن تقولوا على الله ما لا تعلمون
Say: the things that my Lord hath indeed forbidden are: shameful deeds, whether open or secret; sins and trespasses against truth or reason; assigning of partners to Allah, for which He hath given no authority; and saying things about Allah of which ye have no knowledge.

ولكل أمة أجل فإذا جاء أجلهم لا يستأخرون ساعة ولا يستقدمون
To every people is a term appointed: when their term is reached, not an hour can they cause delay, nor (an hour) can they advance (it in anticipation).

يا بني آدم إما يأتينكم رسل منكم يقصون عليكم آياتي فمن اتقى وأصلح فلا خوف عليهم ولا هم يحزنون
O ye Children of Adam! whenever there come to you messengers from amongst you, rehearsing My signs unto you,- those who are righteous and mend (their lives),- on them shall be no fear nor shall they grieve.

والذين كذبوا بآياتنا واستكبروا عنها أولئك أصحاب النار هم فيها خالدون
But those who reject Our signs and treat them with arrogance,- they are companions of the Fire, to dwell therein (for ever).

فمن أظلم ممن افترى على الله كذبا أو كذب بآياته أولئك ينالهم نصيبهم من الكتاب حتى إذا جاءتهم رسلنا يتوفونهم قالوا أين ما كنتم تدعون من دون الله قالوا ضلوا عنا وشهدوا على أنفسهم أنهم كانوا كافرين
Who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against Allah or rejects His Signs? For such, their portion appointed must reach them from the Book (of decrees): until, when our messengers (of death) arrive and take their souls, they say: "Where are the things that ye used to invoke besides Allah?" They will reply, "They have left us in the lurch," And they will bear witness against themselves, that they had rejected Allah.

قال ادخلوا في أمم قد خلت من قبلكم من الجن والإنس في النار كلما دخلت أمة لعنت أختها حتى إذا اداركوا فيها جميعا قالت أخراهم لأولاهم ربنا هؤلاء أضلونا فآتهم عذابا ضعفا من النار قال لكل ضعف ولكن لا تعلمون
He will say: "Enter ye in the company of the peoples who passed away before you - men and jinns, - into the Fire." Every time a new people enters, it curses its sister-people (that went before), until they follow each other, all into the Fire. Saith the last about the first: "Our Lord! it is these that misled us: so give them a double penalty in the Fire." He will say: "Doubled for all": but this ye do not understand.

وقالت أولاهم لأخراهم فما كان لكم علينا من فضل فذوقوا العذاب بما كنتم تكسبون
Then the first will say to the last: "See then! No advantage have ye over us; so taste ye of the penalty for all that ye did!"

إن الذين كذبوا بآياتنا واستكبروا عنها لا تفتح لهم أبواب السماء ولا يدخلون الجنة حتى يلج الجمل في سم الخياط وكذلك نجزي المجرمين
To those who reject Our signs and treat them with arrogance, no opening will there be of the gates of heaven, nor will they enter the garden, until the camel can pass through the eye of the needle: Such is Our reward for those in sin.

لهم من جهنم مهاد ومن فوقهم غواش وكذلك نجزي الظالمين
For them there is Hell, as a couch (below) and folds and folds of covering above: such is Our requital of those who do wrong.

والذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات لا نكلف نفسا إلا وسعها أولئك أصحاب الجنة هم فيها خالدون
But those who believe and work righteousness,- no burden do We place on any soul, but that which it can bear,- they will be Companions of the Garden, therein to dwell (for ever).

ونزعنا ما في صدورهم من غل تجري من تحتهم الأنهار وقالوا الحمد لله الذي هدانا لهذا وما كنا لنهتدي لولا أن هدانا الله لقد جاءت رسل ربنا بالحق ونودوا أن تلكم الجنة أورثتموها بما كنتم تعملون
And We shall remove from their hearts any lurking sense of injury;- beneath them will be rivers flowing;- and they shall say: "Praise be to Allah, who hath guided us to this (felicity): never could we have found guidance, had it not been for the guidance of Allah: indeed it was the truth, that the messengers of our Lord brought unto us." And they shall hear the cry: "Behold! the garden before you! Ye have been made its inheritors, for your deeds (of righteousness)."

ونادى أصحاب الجنة أصحاب النار أن قد وجدنا ما وعدنا ربنا حقا فهل وجدتم ما وعد ربكم حقا قالوا نعم فأذن مؤذن بينهم أن لعنة الله على الظالمين
The Companions of the Garden will call out to the Companions of the Fire: "We have indeed found the promises of our Lord to us true: Have you also found Your Lord's promises true?" They shall say, "Yes"; but a crier shall proclaim between them: "The curse of Allah is on the wrong-doers;-

الذين يصدون عن سبيل الله ويبغونها عوجا وهم بالآخرة كافرون
"Those who would hinder (men) from the path of Allah and would seek in it something crooked: they were those who denied the Hereafter."

وبينهما حجاب وعلى الأعراف رجال يعرفون كلا بسيماهم ونادوا أصحاب الجنة أن سلام عليكم لم يدخلوها وهم يطمعون
Between them shall be a veil, and on the heights will be men who would know every one by his marks: they will call out to the Companions of the Garden, "peace on you": they will not have entered, but they will have an assurance (thereof).

وإذا صرفت أبصارهم تلقاء أصحاب النار قالوا ربنا لا تجعلنا مع القوم الظالمين
When their eyes shall be turned towards the Companions of the Fire, they will say: "Our Lord! send us not to the company of the wrong-doers."

ونادى أصحاب الأعراف رجالا يعرفونهم بسيماهم قالوا ما أغنى عنكم جمعكم وما كنتم تستكبرون
The men on the heights will call to certain men whom they will know from their marks, saying: "Of what profit to you were your hoards and your arrogant ways?

أهؤلاء الذين أقسمتم لا ينالهم الله برحمة ادخلوا الجنة لا خوف عليكم ولا أنتم تحزنون
"Behold! are these not the men whom you swore that Allah with His Mercy would never bless? Enter ye the Garden: no fear shall be on you, nor shall ye grieve."

ونادى أصحاب النار أصحاب الجنة أن أفيضوا علينا من الماء أو مما رزقكم الله قالوا إن الله حرمهما على الكافرين
The Companions of the Fire will call to the Companions of the Garden: "Pour down to us water or anything that Allah doth provide for your sustenance." They will say: "Both these things hath Allah forbidden to those who rejected Him."

الذين اتخذوا دينهم لهوا ولعبا وغرتهم الحياة الدنيا فاليوم ننساهم كما نسوا لقاء يومهم هذا وما كانوا بآياتنا يجحدون
"Such as took their religion to be mere amusement and play, and were deceived by the life of the world." That day shall We forget them as they forgot the meeting of this day of theirs, and as they were wont to reject Our signs.

ولقد جئناهم بكتاب فصلناه على علم هدى ورحمة لقوم يؤمنون
For We had certainly sent unto them a Book, based on knowledge, which We explained in detail,- a guide and a mercy to all who believe.

هل ينظرون إلا تأويله يوم يأتي تأويله يقول الذين نسوه من قبل قد جاءت رسل ربنا بالحق فهل لنا من شفعاء فيشفعوا لنا أو نرد فنعمل غير الذي كنا نعمل قد خسروا أنفسهم وضل عنهم ما كانوا يفترون
Do they just wait for the final fulfilment of the event? On the day the event is finally fulfilled, those who disregarded it before will say: "The messengers of our Lord did indeed bring true (tidings). Have we no intercessors now to intercede on our behalf? Or could we be sent back? then should we behave differently from our behaviour in the past." In fact they will have lost their souls, and the things they invented will leave them in the lurch.

إن ربكم الله الذي خلق السماوات والأرض في ستة أيام ثم استوى على العرش يغشي الليل النهار يطلبه حثيثا والشمس والقمر والنجوم مسخرات بأمره ألا له الخلق والأمر تبارك الله رب العالمين
Your Guardian-Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth in six days, and is firmly established on the throne (of authority): He draweth the night as a veil o'er the day, each seeking the other in rapid succession: He created the sun, the moon, and the stars, (all) governed by laws under His command. Is it not His to create and to govern? Blessed be Allah, the Cherisher and Sustainer of the worlds!

ادعوا ربكم تضرعا وخفية إنه لا يحب المعتدين
Call on your Lord with humility and in private: for Allah loveth not those who trespass beyond bounds.

ولا تفسدوا في الأرض بعد إصلاحها وادعوه خوفا وطمعا إن رحمت الله قريب من المحسنين
Do no mischief on the earth, after it hath been set in order, but call on Him with fear and longing (in your hearts): for the Mercy of Allah is (always) near to those who do good.

وهو الذي يرسل الرياح بشرا بين يدي رحمته حتى إذا أقلت سحابا ثقالا سقناه لبلد ميت فأنزلنا به الماء فأخرجنا به من كل الثمرات كذلك نخرج الموتى لعلكم تذكرون
It is He Who sendeth the winds like heralds of glad tidings, going before His mercy: when they have carried the heavy-laden clouds, We drive them to a land that is dead, make rain to descend thereon, and produce every kind of harvest therewith: thus shall We raise up the dead: perchance ye may remember.

والبلد الطيب يخرج نباته بإذن ربه والذي خبث لا يخرج إلا نكدا كذلك نصرف الآيات لقوم يشكرون
From the land that is clean and good, by the will of its Cherisher, springs up produce, (rich) after its kind: but from the land that is bad, springs up nothing but that which is niggardly: thus do we explain the signs by various (symbols) to those who are grateful.

لقد أرسلنا نوحا إلى قومه فقال يا قوم اعبدوا الله ما لكم من إله غيره إني أخاف عليكم عذاب يوم عظيم
We sent Noah to his people. He said: "O my people! worship Allah! ye have no other god but Him. I fear for you the punishment of a dreadful day!

قال الملأ من قومه إنا لنراك في ضلال مبين
The leaders of his people said: "Ah! we see thee evidently wandering (in mind)."

قال يا قوم ليس بي ضلالة ولكني رسول من رب العالمين
He said: "O my people! No wandering is there in my (mind): on the contrary I am a messenger from the Lord and Cherisher of the worlds!

أبلغكم رسالات ربي وأنصح لكم وأعلم من الله ما لا تعلمون
"I but fulfil towards you the duties of my Lord's mission: Sincere is my advice to you, and I know from Allah something that ye know not.

أوعجبتم أن جاءكم ذكر من ربكم على رجل منكم لينذركم ولتتقوا ولعلكم ترحمون
"Do ye wonder that there hath come to you a message from your Lord, through a man of your own people, to warn you,- so that ye may fear Allah and haply receive His Mercy?"

فكذبوه فأنجيناه والذين معه في الفلك وأغرقنا الذين كذبوا بآياتنا إنهم كانوا قوما عمين
But they rejected him, and We delivered him, and those with him, in the Ark: but We overwhelmed in the flood those who rejected Our signs. They were indeed a blind people!

وإلى عاد أخاهم هودا قال يا قوم اعبدوا الله ما لكم من إله غيره أفلا تتقون
To the 'Ad people, (We sent) Hud, one of their (own) brethren: He said: O my people! worship Allah! ye have no other god but Him will ye not fear (Allah)?"

قال الملأ الذين كفروا من قومه إنا لنراك في سفاهة وإنا لنظنك من الكاذبين
The leaders of the Unbelievers among his people said: "Ah! we see thou art an imbecile!" and "We think thou art a liar!"

قال يا قوم ليس بي سفاهة ولكني رسول من رب العالمين
He said: "O my people! I am no imbecile, but (I am) a messenger from the Lord and Cherisher of the worlds!

أبلغكم رسالات ربي وأنا لكم ناصح أمين
"I but fulfil towards you the duties of my Lord's mission: I am to you a sincere and trustworthy adviser.

أوعجبتم أن جاءكم ذكر من ربكم على رجل منكم لينذركم واذكروا إذ جعلكم خلفاء من بعد قوم نوح وزادكم في الخلق بسطة فاذكروا آلاء الله لعلكم تفلحون
"Do ye wonder that there hath come to you a message from your Lord through a man of your own people, to warn you? call in remembrance that He made you inheritors after the people of Noah, and gave you a stature tall among the nations. Call in remembrance the benefits (ye have received) from Allah: that so ye may prosper."

قالوا أجئتنا لنعبد الله وحده ونذر ما كان يعبد آباؤنا فأتنا بما تعدنا إن كنت من الصادقين
They said: "Comest thou to us, that we may worship Allah alone, and give up the cult of our fathers? bring us what thou threatenest us with, if so be that thou tellest the truth!"

قال قد وقع عليكم من ربكم رجس وغضب أتجادلونني في أسماء سميتموها أنتم وآباؤكم ما نزل الله بها من سلطان فانتظروا إني معكم من المنتظرين
He said: "Punishment and wrath have already come upon you from your Lord: dispute ye with me over names which ye have devised - ye and your fathers,- without authority from Allah? then wait: I am amongst you, also waiting."

فأنجيناه والذين معه برحمة منا وقطعنا دابر الذين كذبوا بآياتنا وما كانوا مؤمنين
We saved him and those who adhered to him. By Our mercy, and We cut off the roots of those who rejected Our signs and did not believe.

وإلى ثمود أخاهم صالحا قال يا قوم اعبدوا الله ما لكم من إله غيره قد جاءتكم بينة من ربكم هذه ناقة الله لكم آية فذروها تأكل في أرض الله ولا تمسوها بسوء فيأخذكم عذاب أليم
To the Thamud people (We sent) Salih, one of their own brethren: He said: "O my people! worship Allah: ye have no other god but Him. Now hath come unto you a clear (Sign) from your Lord! This she-camel of Allah is a Sign unto you: So leave her to graze in Allah's earth, and let her come to no harm, or ye shall be seized with a grievous punishment.

واذكروا إذ جعلكم خلفاء من بعد عاد وبوأكم في الأرض تتخذون من سهولها قصورا وتنحتون الجبال بيوتا فاذكروا آلاء الله ولا تعثوا في الأرض مفسدين
"And remember how He made you inheritors after the 'Ad people and gave you habitations in the land: ye build for yourselves palaces and castles in (open) plains, and carve out homes in the mountains; so bring to remembrance the benefits (ye have received) from Allah, and refrain from evil and mischief on the earth."

قال الملأ الذين استكبروا من قومه للذين استضعفوا لمن آمن منهم أتعلمون أن صالحا مرسل من ربه قالوا إنا بما أرسل به مؤمنون
The leaders of the arrogant party among his people said to those who were reckoned powerless - those among them who believed: "know ye indeed that Salih is a messenger from his Lord?" They said: "We do indeed believe in the revelation which hath been sent through him."

قال الذين استكبروا إنا بالذي آمنتم به كافرون
The Arrogant party said: "For our part, we reject what ye believe in."

فعقروا الناقة وعتوا عن أمر ربهم وقالوا يا صالح ائتنا بما تعدنا إن كنت من المرسلين
Then they ham-strung the she-camel, and insolently defied the order of their Lord, saying: "O Salih! bring about thy threats, if thou art a messenger (of Allah)!"

فأخذتهم الرجفة فأصبحوا في دارهم جاثمين
So the earthquake took them unawares, and they lay prostrate in their homes in the morning!

فتولى عنهم وقال يا قوم لقد أبلغتكم رسالة ربي ونصحت لكم ولكن لا تحبون الناصحين
So Salih left them, saying: "O my people! I did indeed convey to you the message for which I was sent by my Lord: I gave you good counsel, but ye love not good counsellors!"

ولوطا إذ قال لقومه أتأتون الفاحشة ما سبقكم بها من أحد من العالمين
We also (sent) Lut: He said to his people: "Do ye commit lewdness such as no people in creation (ever) committed before you?

إنكم لتأتون الرجال شهوة من دون النساء بل أنتم قوم مسرفون
"For ye practise your lusts on men in preference to women: ye are indeed a people transgressing beyond bounds."

وما كان جواب قومه إلا أن قالوا أخرجوهم من قريتكم إنهم أناس يتطهرون
And his people gave no answer but this: they said, "Drive them out of your city: these are indeed men who want to be clean and pure!"

فأنجيناه وأهله إلا امرأته كانت من الغابرين
But we saved him and his family, except his wife: she was of those who legged behind.

وأمطرنا عليهم مطرا فانظر كيف كان عاقبة المجرمين
And we rained down on them a shower (of brimstone): Then see what was the end of those who indulged in sin and crime!

وإلى مدين أخاهم شعيبا قال يا قوم اعبدوا الله ما لكم من إله غيره قد جاءتكم بينة من ربكم فأوفوا الكيل والميزان ولا تبخسوا الناس أشياءهم ولا تفسدوا في الأرض بعد إصلاحها ذلكم خير لكم إن كنتم مؤمنين
To the Madyan people We sent Shu'aib, one of their own brethren: he said: "O my people! worship Allah; Ye have no other god but Him. Now hath come unto you a clear (Sign) from your Lord! Give just measure and weight, nor withhold from the people the things that are their due; and do no mischief on the earth after it has been set in order: that will be best for you, if ye have Faith.

ولا تقعدوا بكل صراط توعدون وتصدون عن سبيل الله من آمن به وتبغونها عوجا واذكروا إذ كنتم قليلا فكثركم وانظروا كيف كان عاقبة المفسدين
"And squat not on every road, breathing threats, hindering from the path of Allah those who believe in Him, and seeking in it something crooked; But remember how ye were little, and He gave you increase. And hold in your mind's eye what was the end of those who did mischief.

وإن كان طائفة منكم آمنوا بالذي أرسلت به وطائفة لم يؤمنوا فاصبروا حتى يحكم الله بيننا وهو خير الحاكمين
"And if there is a party among you who believes in the message with which I have been sent, and a party which does not believe, hold yourselves in patience until Allah doth decide between us: for He is the best to decide.

قال الملأ الذين استكبروا من قومه لنخرجنك يا شعيب والذين آمنوا معك من قريتنا أو لتعودن في ملتنا قال أولو كنا كارهين
The leaders, the arrogant party among his people, said: "O Shu'aib! we shall certainly drive thee out of our city - (thee) and those who believe with thee; or else ye (thou and they) shall have to return to our ways and religion." He said: "What! even though we do detest (them)?

قد افترينا على الله كذبا إن عدنا في ملتكم بعد إذ نجانا الله منها وما يكون لنا أن نعود فيها إلا أن يشاء الله ربنا وسع ربنا كل شيء علما على الله توكلنا ربنا افتح بيننا وبين قومنا بالحق وأنت خير الفاتحين
"We should indeed invent a lie against Allah, if we returned to your ways after Allah hath rescued us therefrom; nor could we by any manner of means return thereto unless it be as in the will and plan of Allah, Our Lord. Our Lord can reach out to the utmost recesses of things by His knowledge. In the Allah is our trust. our Lord! decide Thou between us and our people in truth, for Thou art the best to decide."

وقال الملأ الذين كفروا من قومه لئن اتبعتم شعيبا إنكم إذا لخاسرون
The leaders, the unbelievers among his people, said: "If ye follow Shu'aib, be sure then ye are ruined!"

فأخذتهم الرجفة فأصبحوا في دارهم جاثمين
But the earthquake took them unawares, and they lay prostrate in their homes before the morning!

الذين كذبوا شعيبا كأن لم يغنوا فيها الذين كذبوا شعيبا كانوا هم الخاسرين
The men who reject Shu'aib became as if they had never been in the homes where they had flourished: the men who rejected Shu'aib - it was they who were ruined!

فتولى عنهم وقال يا قوم لقد أبلغتكم رسالات ربي ونصحت لكم فكيف آسى على قوم كافرين
So Shu'aib left them, saying: "O my people! I did indeed convey to you the messages for which I was sent by my Lord: I gave you good counsel, but how shall I lament over a people who refuse to believe!"

وما أرسلنا في قرية من نبي إلا أخذنا أهلها بالبأساء والضراء لعلهم يضرعون
Whenever We sent a prophet to a town, We took up its people in suffering and adversity, in order that they might learn humility.

ثم بدلنا مكان السيئة الحسنة حتى عفوا وقالوا قد مس آباءنا الضراء والسراء فأخذناهم بغتة وهم لا يشعرون
Then We changed their suffering into prosperity, until they grew and multiplied, and began to say: "Our fathers (too) were touched by suffering and affluence"... Behold! We called them to account of a sudden, while they realised not (their peril).

ولو أن أهل القرى آمنوا واتقوا لفتحنا عليهم بركات من السماء والأرض ولكن كذبوا فأخذناهم بما كانوا يكسبون
If the people of the towns had but believed and feared Allah, We should indeed have opened out to them (All kinds of) blessings from heaven and earth; but they rejected (the truth), and We brought them to book for their misdeeds.

أفأمن أهل القرى أن يأتيهم بأسنا بياتا وهم نائمون
Did the people of the towns feel secure against the coming of Our wrath by night while they were asleep?

أوأمن أهل القرى أن يأتيهم بأسنا ضحى وهم يلعبون
Or else did they feel secure against its coming in broad daylight while they played about (care-free)?

أفأمنوا مكر الله فلا يأمن مكر الله إلا القوم الخاسرون
Did they then feel secure against the plan of Allah?- but no one can feel secure from the Plan of Allah, except those (doomed) to ruin!

أولم يهد للذين يرثون الأرض من بعد أهلها أن لو نشاء أصبناهم بذنوبهم ونطبع على قلوبهم فهم لا يسمعون
To those who inherit the earth in succession to its (previous) possessors, is it not a guiding, (lesson) that, if We so willed, We could punish them (too) for their sins, and seal up their hearts so that they could not hear?

تلك القرى نقص عليك من أنبائها ولقد جاءتهم رسلهم بالبينات فما كانوا ليؤمنوا بما كذبوا من قبل كذلك يطبع الله على قلوب الكافرين
Such were the towns whose story We (thus) relate unto thee: There came indeed to them their messengers with clear (signs): But they would not believe what they had rejected before. Thus doth Allah seal up the hearts of those who reject faith.

وما وجدنا لأكثرهم من عهد وإن وجدنا أكثرهم لفاسقين
Most of them We found not men (true) to their covenant: but most of them We found rebellious and disobedient.

ثم بعثنا من بعدهم موسى بآياتنا إلى فرعون وملئه فظلموا بها فانظر كيف كان عاقبة المفسدين
Then after them We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they wrongfully rejected them: So see what was the end of those who made mischief.

وقال موسى يا فرعون إني رسول من رب العالمين
Moses said: "O Pharaoh! I am a messenger from the Lord of the worlds,-

حقيق على أن لا أقول على الله إلا الحق قد جئتكم ببينة من ربكم فأرسل معي بني إسرائيل
One for whom it is right to say nothing but truth about Allah. Now have I come unto you (people), from your Lord, with a clear (Sign): So let the Children of Israel depart along with me."

قال إن كنت جئت بآية فأت بها إن كنت من الصادقين
(Pharaoh) said: "If indeed thou hast come with a Sign, show it forth,- if thou tellest the truth."

فألقى عصاه فإذا هي ثعبان مبين
Then (Moses) threw his rod, and behold! it was a serpent, plain (for all to see)!

ونزع يده فإذا هي بيضاء للناظرين
And he drew out his hand, and behold! it was white to all beholders!

قال الملأ من قوم فرعون إن هذا لساحر عليم
Said the Chiefs of the people of Pharaoh: "This is indeed a sorcerer well-versed.

يريد أن يخرجكم من أرضكم فماذا تأمرون
"His plan is to get you out of your land: then what is it ye counsel?"

قالوا أرجه وأخاه وأرسل في المدائن حاشرين
They said: "Keep him and his brother in suspense (for a while); and send to the cities men to collect-

يأتوك بكل ساحر عليم
And bring up to thee all (our) sorcerers well-versed."

وجاء السحرة فرعون قالوا إن لنا لأجرا إن كنا نحن الغالبين
So there came the sorcerers to Pharaoh: They said, "of course we shall have a (suitable) reward if we win!"

قال نعم وإنكم لمن المقربين
He said: "Yea, (and more),- for ye shall in that case be (raised to posts) nearest (to my person)."

قالوا يا موسى إما أن تلقي وإما أن نكون نحن الملقين
They said: "O Moses! wilt thou throw (first), or shall we have the (first) throw?"

قال ألقوا فلما ألقوا سحروا أعين الناس واسترهبوهم وجاءوا بسحر عظيم
Said Moses: "Throw ye (first)." So when they threw, they bewitched the eyes of the people, and struck terror into them: for they showed a great (feat of) magic.

وأوحينا إلى موسى أن ألق عصاك فإذا هي تلقف ما يأفكون
We put it into Moses's mind by inspiration: "Throw (now) thy rod": and behold! it swallows up straight away all the falsehoods which they fake!

فوقع الحق وبطل ما كانوا يعملون
Thus truth was confirmed, and all that they did was made of no effect.

فغلبوا هنالك وانقلبوا صاغرين
So the (great ones) were vanquished there and then, and were made to look small.

وألقي السحرة ساجدين
But the sorcerers fell down prostrate in adoration.

قالوا آمنا برب العالمين
Saying: "We believe in the Lord of the Worlds,-

رب موسى وهارون
"The Lord of Moses and Aaron."

قال فرعون آمنتم به قبل أن آذن لكم إن هذا لمكر مكرتموه في المدينة لتخرجوا منها أهلها فسوف تعلمون
Said Pharaoh: "Believe ye in Him before I give you permission? Surely this is a trick which ye have planned in the city to drive out its people: but soon shall ye know (the consequences).

لأقطعن أيديكم وأرجلكم من خلاف ثم لأصلبنكم أجمعين
"Be sure I will cut off your hands and your feet on apposite sides, and I will cause you all to die on the cross."

قالوا إنا إلى ربنا منقلبون
They said: "For us, We are but sent back unto our Lord:

وما تنقم منا إلا أن آمنا بآيات ربنا لما جاءتنا ربنا أفرغ علينا صبرا وتوفنا مسلمين
"But thou dost wreak thy vengeance on us simply because we believed in the Signs of our Lord when they reached us! Our Lord! pour out on us patience and constancy, and take our souls unto thee as Muslims (who bow to thy will)!

وقال الملأ من قوم فرعون أتذر موسى وقومه ليفسدوا في الأرض ويذرك وآلهتك قال سنقتل أبناءهم ونستحيي نساءهم وإنا فوقهم قاهرون
Said the chiefs of Pharaoh's people: "Wilt thou leave Moses and his people, to spread mischief in the land, and to abandon thee and thy gods?" He said: "Their male children will we slay; (only) their females will we save alive; and we have over them (power) irresistible."

قال موسى لقومه استعينوا بالله واصبروا إن الأرض لله يورثها من يشاء من عباده والعاقبة للمتقين
Said Moses to his people: "Pray for help from Allah, and (wait) in patience and constancy: for the earth is Allah's, to give as a heritage to such of His servants as He pleaseth; and the end is (best) for the righteous.

قالوا أوذينا من قبل أن تأتينا ومن بعد ما جئتنا قال عسى ربكم أن يهلك عدوكم ويستخلفكم في الأرض فينظر كيف تعملون
They said: "We have had (nothing but) trouble, both before and after thou camest to us." He said: "It may be that your Lord will destroy your enemy and make you inheritors in the earth; that so He may try you by your deeds."

ولقد أخذنا آل فرعون بالسنين ونقص من الثمرات لعلهم يذكرون
We punished the people of Pharaoh with years (of droughts) and shortness of crops; that they might receive admonition.

فإذا جاءتهم الحسنة قالوا لنا هذه وإن تصبهم سيئة يطيروا بموسى ومن معه ألا إنما طائرهم عند الله ولكن أكثرهم لا يعلمون
But when good (times) came, they said, "This is due to us;" When gripped by calamity, they ascribed it to evil omens connected with Moses and those with him! Behold! in truth the omens of evil are theirs in Allah's sight, but most of them do not understand!

وقالوا مهما تأتنا به من آية لتسحرنا بها فما نحن لك بمؤمنين
They said (to Moses): "Whatever be the Signs thou bringest, to work therewith thy sorcery on us, we shall never believe in thee.

فأرسلنا عليهم الطوفان والجراد والقمل والضفادع والدم آيات مفصلات فاستكبروا وكانوا قوما مجرمين
So We sent (plagues) on them: Wholesale death, Locusts, Lice, Frogs, And Blood: Signs openly self-explained: but they were steeped in arrogance,- a people given to sin.

ولما وقع عليهم الرجز قالوا يا موسى ادع لنا ربك بما عهد عندك لئن كشفت عنا الرجز لنؤمنن لك ولنرسلن معك بني إسرائيل
Every time the penalty fell on them, they said: "O Moses! on your behalf call on thy Lord in virtue of his promise to thee: If thou wilt remove the penalty from us, we shall truly believe in thee, and we shall send away the Children of Israel with thee."

فلما كشفنا عنهم الرجز إلى أجل هم بالغوه إذا هم ينكثون
But every time We removed the penalty from them according to a fixed term which they had to fulfil,- Behold! they broke their word!

فانتقمنا منهم فأغرقناهم في اليم بأنهم كذبوا بآياتنا وكانوا عنها غافلين
So We exacted retribution from them: We drowned them in the sea, because they rejected Our Signs and failed to take warning from them.

وأورثنا القوم الذين كانوا يستضعفون مشارق الأرض ومغاربها التي باركنا فيها وتمت كلمت ربك الحسنى على بني إسرائيل بما صبروا ودمرنا ما كان يصنع فرعون وقومه وما كانوا يعرشون
And We made a people, considered weak (and of no account), inheritors of lands in both east and west, - lands whereon We sent down Our blessings. The fair promise of thy Lord was fulfilled for the Children of Israel, because they had patience and constancy, and We levelled to the ground the great works and fine buildings which Pharaoh and his people erected (with such pride).

وجاوزنا ببني إسرائيل البحر فأتوا على قوم يعكفون على أصنام لهم قالوا يا موسى اجعل لنا إلها كما لهم آلهة قال إنكم قوم تجهلون
We took the Children of Israel (with safety) across the sea. They came upon a people devoted entirely to some idols they had. They said: "O Moses! fashion for us a god like unto the gods they have." He said: "Surely ye are a people without knowledge.

إن هؤلاء متبر ما هم فيه وباطل ما كانوا يعملون
"As to these folk,- the cult they are in is (but) a fragment of a ruin, and vain is the (worship) which they practise."

قال أغير الله أبغيكم إلها وهو فضلكم على العالمين
He said: "Shall I seek for you a god other than the (true) Allah, when it is Allah Who hath endowed you with gifts above the nations?"

وإذ أنجيناكم من آل فرعون يسومونكم سوء العذاب يقتلون أبناءكم ويستحيون نساءكم وفي ذلكم بلاء من ربكم عظيم
And remember We rescued you from Pharaoh's people, who afflicted you with the worst of penalties, who slew your male children and saved alive your females: in that was a momentous trial from your Lord.

وواعدنا موسى ثلاثين ليلة وأتممناها بعشر فتم ميقات ربه أربعين ليلة وقال موسى لأخيه هارون اخلفني في قومي وأصلح ولا تتبع سبيل المفسدين
We appointed for Moses thirty nights, and completed (the period) with ten (more): thus was completed the term (of communion) with his Lord, forty nights. And Moses had charged his brother Aaron (before he went up): "Act for me amongst my people: Do right, and follow not the way of those who do mischief."

ولما جاء موسى لميقاتنا وكلمه ربه قال رب أرني أنظر إليك قال لن تراني ولكن انظر إلى الجبل فإن استقر مكانه فسوف تراني فلما تجلى ربه للجبل جعله دكا وخر موسى صعقا فلما أفاق قال سبحانك تبت إليك وأنا أول المؤمنين
When Moses came to the place appointed by Us, and his Lord addressed him, He said: "O my Lord! show (Thyself) to me, that I may look upon thee." Allah said: "By no means canst thou see Me (direct); But look upon the mount; if it abide in its place, then shalt thou see Me." When his Lord manifested His glory on the Mount, He made it as dust. And Moses fell down in a swoon. When he recovered his senses he said: "Glory be to Thee! to Thee I turn in repentance, and I am the first to believe."

قال يا موسى إني اصطفيتك على الناس برسالاتي وبكلامي فخذ ما آتيتك وكن من الشاكرين
(Allah) said: "O Moses! I have chosen thee above (other) men, by the mission I (have given thee) and the words I (have spoken to thee): take then the (revelation) which I give thee, and be of those who give thanks."

وكتبنا له في الألواح من كل شيء موعظة وتفصيلا لكل شيء فخذها بقوة وأمر قومك يأخذوا بأحسنها سأريكم دار الفاسقين
And We ordained laws for him in the tablets in all matters, both commanding and explaining all things, (and said): "Take and hold these with firmness, and enjoin thy people to hold fast by the best in the precepts: soon shall I show you the homes of the wicked,- (How they lie desolate)."

سأصرف عن آياتي الذين يتكبرون في الأرض بغير الحق وإن يروا كل آية لا يؤمنوا بها وإن يروا سبيل الرشد لا يتخذوه سبيلا وإن يروا سبيل الغي يتخذوه سبيلا ذلك بأنهم كذبوا بآياتنا وكانوا عنها غافلين
Those who behave arrogantly on the earth in defiance of right - them will I turn away from My signs: Even if they see all the signs, they will not believe in them; and if they see the way of right conduct, they will not adopt it as the way; but if they see the way of error, that is the way they will adopt. For they have rejected our signs, and failed to take warning from them.

والذين كذبوا بآياتنا ولقاء الآخرة حبطت أعمالهم هل يجزون إلا ما كانوا يعملون
Those who reject Our signs and the meeting in the Hereafter,- vain are their deeds: Can they expect to be rewarded except as they have wrought?

واتخذ قوم موسى من بعده من حليهم عجلا جسدا له خوار ألم يروا أنه لا يكلمهم ولا يهديهم سبيلا اتخذوه وكانوا ظالمين
The people of Moses made, in his absence, out of their ornaments, the image of calf, (for worship): it seemed to low: did they not see that it could neither speak to them, nor show them the way? They took it for worship and they did wrong.

ولما سقط في أيديهم ورأوا أنهم قد ضلوا قالوا لئن لم يرحمنا ربنا ويغفر لنا لنكونن من الخاسرين
When they repented, and saw that they had erred, they said: "If our Lord have not mercy upon us and forgive us, we shall indeed be of those who perish."

ولما رجع موسى إلى قومه غضبان أسفا قال بئسما خلفتموني من بعدي أعجلتم أمر ربكم وألقى الألواح وأخذ برأس أخيه يجره إليه قال ابن أم إن القوم استضعفوني وكادوا يقتلونني فلا تشمت بي الأعداء ولا تجعلني مع القوم الظالمين
When Moses came back to his people, angry and grieved, he said: "Evil it is that ye have done in my place in my absence: did ye make haste to bring on the judgment of your Lord?" He put down the tablets, seized his brother by (the hair of) his head, and dragged him to him. Aaron said: "Son of my mother! the people did indeed reckon me as naught, and went near to slaying me! Make not the enemies rejoice over my misfortune, nor count thou me amongst the people of sin."

قال رب اغفر لي ولأخي وأدخلنا في رحمتك وأنت أرحم الراحمين
Moses prayed: "O my Lord! forgive me and my brother! admit us to Thy mercy! for Thou art the Most Merciful of those who show mercy!"

إن الذين اتخذوا العجل سينالهم غضب من ربهم وذلة في الحياة الدنيا وكذلك نجزي المفترين
Those who took the calf (for worship) will indeed be overwhelmed with wrath from their Lord, and with shame in this life: thus do We recompense those who invent (falsehoods).

والذين عملوا السيئات ثم تابوا من بعدها وآمنوا إن ربك من بعدها لغفور رحيم
But those who do wrong but repent thereafter and (truly) believe,- verily thy Lord is thereafter Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

ولما سكت عن موسى الغضب أخذ الألواح وفي نسختها هدى ورحمة للذين هم لربهم يرهبون
When the anger of Moses was appeased, he took up the tablets: in the writing thereon was guidance and Mercy for such as fear their Lord.

واختار موسى قومه سبعين رجلا لميقاتنا فلما أخذتهم الرجفة قال رب لو شئت أهلكتهم من قبل وإياي أتهلكنا بما فعل السفهاء منا إن هي إلا فتنتك تضل بها من تشاء وتهدي من تشاء أنت ولينا فاغفر لنا وارحمنا وأنت خير الغافرين
And Moses chose seventy of his people for Our place of meeting: when they were seized with violent quaking, he prayed: "O my Lord! if it had been Thy will Thou couldst have destroyed, long before, both them and me: wouldst Thou destroy us for the deeds of the foolish ones among us? this is no more than Thy trial: by it Thou causest whom Thou wilt to stray, and Thou leadest whom Thou wilt into the right path. Thou art our Protector: so forgive us and give us Thy mercy; for Thou art the best of those who forgive.

واكتب لنا في هذه الدنيا حسنة وفي الآخرة إنا هدنا إليك قال عذابي أصيب به من أشاء ورحمتي وسعت كل شيء فسأكتبها للذين يتقون ويؤتون الزكاة والذين هم بآياتنا يؤمنون
"And ordain for us that which is good, in this life and in the Hereafter: for we have turned unto Thee." He said: "With My punishment I visit whom I will; but My mercy extendeth to all things. That (mercy) I shall ordain for those who do right, and practise regular charity, and those who believe in Our signs;-

الذين يتبعون الرسول النبي الأمي الذي يجدونه مكتوبا عندهم في التوراة والإنجيل يأمرهم بالمعروف وينهاهم عن المنكر ويحل لهم الطيبات ويحرم عليهم الخبائث ويضع عنهم إصرهم والأغلال التي كانت عليهم فالذين آمنوا به وعزروه ونصروه واتبعوا النور الذي أنزل معه أولئك هم المفلحون
"Those who follow the messenger, the unlettered Prophet, whom they find mentioned in their own (scriptures),- in the law and the Gospel;- for he commands them what is just and forbids them what is evil; he allows them as lawful what is good (and pure) and prohibits them from what is bad (and impure); He releases them from their heavy burdens and from the yokes that are upon them. So it is those who believe in him, honour him, help him, and follow the light which is sent down with him,- it is they who will prosper."

قل يا أيها الناس إني رسول الله إليكم جميعا الذي له ملك السماوات والأرض لا إله إلا هو يحيي ويميت فآمنوا بالله ورسوله النبي الأمي الذي يؤمن بالله وكلماته واتبعوه لعلكم تهتدون
Say: "O men! I am sent unto you all, as the Messenger of Allah, to Whom belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth: there is no god but He: it is He That giveth both life and death. So believe in Allah and His Messenger, the Unlettered Prophet, who believeth in Allah and His words: follow him that (so) ye may be guided."

ومن قوم موسى أمة يهدون بالحق وبه يعدلون
Of the people of Moses there is a section who guide and do justice in the light of truth.

وقطعناهم اثنتي عشرة أسباطا أمما وأوحينا إلى موسى إذ استسقاه قومه أن اضرب بعصاك الحجر فانبجست منه اثنتا عشرة عينا قد علم كل أناس مشربهم وظللنا عليهم الغمام وأنزلنا عليهم المن والسلوى كلوا من طيبات ما رزقناكم وما ظلمونا ولكن كانوا أنفسهم يظلمون
We divided them into twelve tribes or nations. We directed Moses by inspiration, when his (thirsty) people asked him for water: "Strike the rock with thy staff": out of it there gushed forth twelve springs: Each group knew its own place for water. We gave them the shade of clouds, and sent down to them manna and quails, (saying): "Eat of the good things We have provided for you": (but they rebelled); to Us they did no harm, but they harmed their own souls.

وإذ قيل لهم اسكنوا هذه القرية وكلوا منها حيث شئتم وقولوا حطة وادخلوا الباب سجدا نغفر لكم خطيئاتكم سنزيد المحسنين
And remember it was said to them: "Dwell in this town and eat therein as ye wish, but say the word of humility and enter the gate in a posture of humility: We shall forgive you your faults; We shall increase (the portion of) those who do good."

فبدل الذين ظلموا منهم قولا غير الذي قيل لهم فأرسلنا عليهم رجزا من السماء بما كانوا يظلمون
But the transgressors among them changed the word from that which had been given them so we sent on them a plague from heaven. For that they repeatedly transgressed.

واسألهم عن القرية التي كانت حاضرة البحر إذ يعدون في السبت إذ تأتيهم حيتانهم يوم سبتهم شرعا ويوم لا يسبتون لا تأتيهم كذلك نبلوهم بما كانوا يفسقون
Ask them concerning the town standing close by the sea. Behold! they transgressed in the matter of the Sabbath. For on the day of their Sabbath their fish did come to them, openly holding up their heads, but on the day they had no Sabbath, they came not: thus did We make a trial of them, for they were given to transgression.

وإذ قالت أمة منهم لم تعظون قوما الله مهلكهم أو معذبهم عذابا شديدا قالوا معذرة إلى ربكم ولعلهم يتقون
When some of them said: "Why do ye preach to a people whom Allah will destroy or visit with a terrible punishment?"- said the preachers:" To discharge our duty to your Lord, and perchance they may fear Him."

فلما نسوا ما ذكروا به أنجينا الذين ينهون عن السوء وأخذنا الذين ظلموا بعذاب بئيس بما كانوا يفسقون
When they disregarded the warnings that had been given them, We rescued those who forbade Evil; but We visited the wrong-doers with a grievous punishment because they were given to transgression.

فلما عتوا عن ما نهوا عنه قلنا لهم كونوا قردة خاسئين
When in their insolence they transgressed (all) prohibitions, We said to them: "Be ye apes, despised and rejected."

وإذ تأذن ربك ليبعثن عليهم إلى يوم القيامة من يسومهم سوء العذاب إن ربك لسريع العقاب وإنه لغفور رحيم
Behold! thy Lord did declare that He would send against them, to the Day of Judgment, those who would afflict them with grievous penalty. Thy Lord is quick in retribution, but He is also Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

وقطعناهم في الأرض أمما منهم الصالحون ومنهم دون ذلك وبلوناهم بالحسنات والسيئات لعلهم يرجعون
We broke them up into sections on this earth. There are among them some that are the righteous, and some that are the opposite. We have tried them with both prosperity and adversity: In order that they might turn (to us).

فخلف من بعدهم خلف ورثوا الكتاب يأخذون عرض هذا الأدنى ويقولون سيغفر لنا وإن يأتهم عرض مثله يأخذوه ألم يؤخذ عليهم ميثاق الكتاب أن لا يقولوا على الله إلا الحق ودرسوا ما فيه والدار الآخرة خير للذين يتقون أفلا تعقلون
After them succeeded an (evil) generation: They inherited the Book, but they chose (for themselves) the vanities of this world, saying (for excuse): "(Everything) will be forgiven us." (Even so), if similar vanities came their way, they would (again) seize them. Was not the covenant of the Book taken from them, that they would not ascribe to Allah anything but the truth? and they study what is in the Book. But best for the righteous is the home in the Hereafter. Will ye not understand?

والذين يمسكون بالكتاب وأقاموا الصلاة إنا لا نضيع أجر المصلحين
As to those who hold fast by the Book and establish regular prayer,- never shall We suffer the reward of the righteous to perish.

وإذ نتقنا الجبل فوقهم كأنه ظلة وظنوا أنه واقع بهم خذوا ما آتيناكم بقوة واذكروا ما فيه لعلكم تتقون
When We shook the Mount over them, as if it had been a canopy, and they thought it was going to fall on them (We said): "Hold firmly to what We have given you, and bring (ever) to remembrance what is therein; perchance ye may fear Allah."

وإذ أخذ ربك من بني آدم من ظهورهم ذريتهم وأشهدهم على أنفسهم ألست بربكم قالوا بلى شهدنا أن تقولوا يوم القيامة إنا كنا عن هذا غافلين
When thy Lord drew forth from the Children of Adam - from their loins - their descendants, and made them testify concerning themselves, (saying): "Am I not your Lord (who cherishes and sustains you)?"- They said: "Yea! We do testify!" (This), lest ye should say on the Day of Judgment: "Of this we were never mindful":

أو تقولوا إنما أشرك آباؤنا من قبل وكنا ذرية من بعدهم أفتهلكنا بما فعل المبطلون
Or lest ye should say: "Our fathers before us may have taken false gods, but we are (their) descendants after them: wilt Thou then destroy us because of the deeds of men who were futile?"

وكذلك نفصل الآيات ولعلهم يرجعون
Thus do We explain the signs in detail; and perchance they may turn (unto Us).

واتل عليهم نبأ الذي آتيناه آياتنا فانسلخ منها فأتبعه الشيطان فكان من الغاوين
Relate to them the story of the man to whom We sent Our signs, but he passed them by: so Satan followed him up, and he went astray.

ولو شئنا لرفعناه بها ولكنه أخلد إلى الأرض واتبع هواه فمثله كمثل الكلب إن تحمل عليه يلهث أو تتركه يلهث ذلك مثل القوم الذين كذبوا بآياتنا فاقصص القصص لعلهم يتفكرون
If it had been Our will, We should have elevated him with Our signs; but he inclined to the earth, and followed his own vain desires. His similitude is that of a dog: if you attack him, he lolls out his tongue, or if you leave him alone, he (still) lolls out his tongue. That is the similitude of those who reject Our signs; So relate the story; perchance they may reflect.

ساء مثلا القوم الذين كذبوا بآياتنا وأنفسهم كانوا يظلمون
Evil as an example are people who reject Our signs and wrong their own souls.

من يهد الله فهو المهتدي ومن يضلل فأولئك هم الخاسرون
Whom Allah doth guide,- he is on the right path: whom He rejects from His guidance,- such are the persons who perish.

ولقد ذرأنا لجهنم كثيرا من الجن والإنس لهم قلوب لا يفقهون بها ولهم أعين لا يبصرون بها ولهم آذان لا يسمعون بها أولئك كالأنعام بل هم أضل أولئك هم الغافلون
Many are the Jinns and men we have made for Hell: They have hearts wherewith they understand not, eyes wherewith they see not, and ears wherewith they hear not. They are like cattle,- nay more misguided: for they are heedless (of warning).

ولله الأسماء الحسنى فادعوه بها وذروا الذين يلحدون في أسمائه سيجزون ما كانوا يعملون
The most beautiful names belong to Allah: so call on him by them; but shun such men as use profanity in his names: for what they do, they will soon be requited.

وممن خلقنا أمة يهدون بالحق وبه يعدلون
Of those We have created are people who direct (others) with truth. And dispense justice therewith.

والذين كذبوا بآياتنا سنستدرجهم من حيث لا يعلمون
Those who reject Our signs, We shall gradually visit with punishment, in ways they perceive not;

وأملي لهم إن كيدي متين
Respite will I grant unto them: for My scheme is strong (and unfailing).

أولم يتفكروا ما بصاحبهم من جنة إن هو إلا نذير مبين
Do they not reflect? Their companion is not seized with madness: he is but a perspicuous warner.

أولم ينظروا في ملكوت السماوات والأرض وما خلق الله من شيء وأن عسى أن يكون قد اقترب أجلهم فبأي حديث بعده يؤمنون
Do they see nothing in the government of the heavens and the earth and all that Allah hath created? (Do they not see) that it may well be that their terms is nigh drawing to an end? In what message after this will they then believe?

من يضلل الله فلا هادي له ويذرهم في طغيانهم يعمهون
To such as Allah rejects from His guidance, there can be no guide: He will leave them in their trespasses, wandering in distraction.

يسألونك عن الساعة أيان مرساها قل إنما علمها عند ربي لا يجليها لوقتها إلا هو ثقلت في السماوات والأرض لا تأتيكم إلا بغتة يسألونك كأنك حفي عنها قل إنما علمها عند الله ولكن أكثر الناس لا يعلمون
They ask thee about the (final) Hour - when will be its appointed time? Say: "The knowledge thereof is with my Lord (alone): None but He can reveal as to when it will occur. Heavy were its burden through the heavens and the earth. Only, all of a sudden will it come to you." They ask thee as if thou Wert eager in search thereof: Say: "The knowledge thereof is with Allah (alone), but most men know not."

قل لا أملك لنفسي نفعا ولا ضرا إلا ما شاء الله ولو كنت أعلم الغيب لاستكثرت من الخير وما مسني السوء إن أنا إلا نذير وبشير لقوم يؤمنون
Say: "I have no power over any good or harm to myself except as Allah willeth. If I had knowledge of the unseen, I should have multiplied all good, and no evil should have touched me: I am but a warner, and a bringer of glad tidings to those who have faith."

هو الذي خلقكم من نفس واحدة وجعل منها زوجها ليسكن إليها فلما تغشاها حملت حملا خفيفا فمرت به فلما أثقلت دعوا الله ربهما لئن آتيتنا صالحا لنكونن من الشاكرين
It is He Who created you from a single person, and made his mate of like nature, in order that he might dwell with her (in love). When they are united, she bears a light burden and carries it about (unnoticed). When she grows heavy, they both pray to Allah their Lord, (saying): "If Thou givest us a goodly child, we vow we shall (ever) be grateful."

فلما آتاهما صالحا جعلا له شركاء فيما آتاهما فتعالى الله عما يشركون
But when He giveth them a goodly child, they ascribe to others a share in the gift they have received: but Allah is exalted high above the partners they ascribe to Him.

أيشركون ما لا يخلق شيئا وهم يخلقون
Do they indeed ascribe to Him as partners things that can create nothing, but are themselves created?

ولا يستطيعون لهم نصرا ولا أنفسهم ينصرون
No aid can they give them, nor can they aid themselves!

وإن تدعوهم إلى الهدى لا يتبعوكم سواء عليكم أدعوتموهم أم أنتم صامتون
If ye call them to guidance, they will not obey: For you it is the same whether ye call them or ye hold your peace!

إن الذين تدعون من دون الله عباد أمثالكم فادعوهم فليستجيبوا لكم إن كنتم صادقين
Verily those whom ye call upon besides Allah are servants like unto you: Call upon them, and let them listen to your prayer, if ye are (indeed) truthful!

ألهم أرجل يمشون بها أم لهم أيد يبطشون بها أم لهم أعين يبصرون بها أم لهم آذان يسمعون بها قل ادعوا شركاءكم ثم كيدون فلا تنظرون
Have they feet to walk with? Or hands to lay hold with? Or eyes to see with? Or ears to hear with? Say: "Call your 'god-partners', scheme (your worst) against me, and give me no respite!

إن وليي الله الذي نزل الكتاب وهو يتولى الصالحين
"For my Protector is Allah, Who revealed the Book (from time to time), and He will choose and befriend the righteous.

والذين تدعون من دونه لا يستطيعون نصركم ولا أنفسهم ينصرون
"But those ye call upon besides Him, are unable to help you, and indeed to help themselves."

وإن تدعوهم إلى الهدى لا يسمعوا وتراهم ينظرون إليك وهم لا يبصرون
If thou callest them to guidance, they hear not. Thou wilt see them looking at thee, but they see not.

خذ العفو وأمر بالعرف وأعرض عن الجاهلين
Hold to forgiveness; command what is right; But turn away from the ignorant.

وإما ينزغنك من الشيطان نزغ فاستعذ بالله إنه سميع عليم
If a suggestion from Satan assail thy (mind), seek refuge with Allah; for He heareth and knoweth (all things).

إن الذين اتقوا إذا مسهم طائف من الشيطان تذكروا فإذا هم مبصرون
Those who fear Allah, when a thought of evil from Satan assaults them, bring Allah to remembrance, when lo! they see (aright)!

وإخوانهم يمدونهم في الغي ثم لا يقصرون
But their brethren (the evil ones) plunge them deeper into error, and never relax (their efforts).

وإذا لم تأتهم بآية قالوا لولا اجتبيتها قل إنما أتبع ما يوحى إلي من ربي هذا بصائر من ربكم وهدى ورحمة لقوم يؤمنون
If thou bring them not a revelation, they say: "Why hast thou not got it together?" Say: "I but follow what is revealed to me from my Lord: this is (nothing but) lights from your Lord, and Guidance, and mercy, for any who have faith."

وإذا قرئ القرآن فاستمعوا له وأنصتوا لعلكم ترحمون
When the Qur'an is read, listen to it with attention, and hold your peace: that ye may receive Mercy.

واذكر ربك في نفسك تضرعا وخيفة ودون الجهر من القول بالغدو والآصال ولا تكن من الغافلين
And do thou (O reader!) Bring thy Lord to remembrance in thy (very) soul, with humility and in reverence, without loudness in words, in the mornings and evenings; and be not thou of those who are unheedful.

إن الذين عند ربك لا يستكبرون عن عبادته ويسبحونه وله يسجدون
Those who are near to thy Lord, disdain not to do Him worship: They celebrate His praises, and prostrate before Him.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم يسألونك عن الأنفال قل الأنفال لله والرسول فاتقوا الله وأصلحوا ذات بينكم وأطيعوا الله ورسوله إن كنتم مؤمنين
They ask thee concerning (things taken as) spoils of war. Say: "(such) spoils are at the disposal of Allah and the Messenger: So fear Allah, and keep straight the relations between yourselves: Obey Allah and His Messenger, if ye do believe."

إنما المؤمنون الذين إذا ذكر الله وجلت قلوبهم وإذا تليت عليهم آياته زادتهم إيمانا وعلى ربهم يتوكلون
For, Believers are those who, when Allah is mentioned, feel a tremor in their hearts, and when they hear His signs rehearsed, find their faith strengthened, and put (all) their trust in their Lord;

الذين يقيمون الصلاة ومما رزقناهم ينفقون
Who establish regular prayers and spend (freely) out of the gifts We have given them for sustenance:

أولئك هم المؤمنون حقا لهم درجات عند ربهم ومغفرة ورزق كريم
Such in truth are the believers: they have grades of dignity with their Lord, and forgiveness, and generous sustenance:

كما أخرجك ربك من بيتك بالحق وإن فريقا من المؤمنين لكارهون
Just as thy Lord ordered thee out of thy house in truth, even though a party among the Believers disliked it,

يجادلونك في الحق بعد ما تبين كأنما يساقون إلى الموت وهم ينظرون
Disputing with thee concerning the truth after it was made manifest, as if they were being driven to death and they (actually) saw it.

وإذ يعدكم الله إحدى الطائفتين أنها لكم وتودون أن غير ذات الشوكة تكون لكم ويريد الله أن يحق الحق بكلماته ويقطع دابر الكافرين
Behold! Allah promised you one of the two (enemy) parties, that it should be yours: Ye wished that the one unarmed should be yours, but Allah willed to justify the Truth according to His words and to cut off the roots of the Unbelievers;-

ليحق الحق ويبطل الباطل ولو كره المجرمون
That He might justify Truth and prove Falsehood false, distasteful though it be to those in guilt.

إذ تستغيثون ربكم فاستجاب لكم أني ممدكم بألف من الملائكة مردفين
Remember ye implored the assistance of your Lord, and He answered you: "I will assist you with a thousand of the angels, ranks on ranks."

وما جعله الله إلا بشرى ولتطمئن به قلوبكم وما النصر إلا من عند الله إن الله عزيز حكيم
Allah made it but a message of hope, and an assurance to your hearts: (in any case) there is no help except from Allah: and Allah is Exalted in Power, Wise.

إذ يغشيكم النعاس أمنة منه وينزل عليكم من السماء ماء ليطهركم به ويذهب عنكم رجز الشيطان وليربط على قلوبكم ويثبت به الأقدام
Remember He covered you with a sort of drowsiness, to give you calm as from Himself, and he caused rain to descend on you from heaven, to clean you therewith, to remove from you the stain of Satan, to strengthen your hearts, and to plant your feet firmly therewith.

إذ يوحي ربك إلى الملائكة أني معكم فثبتوا الذين آمنوا سألقي في قلوب الذين كفروا الرعب فاضربوا فوق الأعناق واضربوا منهم كل بنان
Remember thy Lord inspired the angels (with the message): "I am with you: give firmness to the Believers: I will instil terror into the hearts of the Unbelievers: smite ye above their necks and smite all their finger-tips off them."

ذلك بأنهم شاقوا الله ورسوله ومن يشاقق الله ورسوله فإن الله شديد العقاب
This because they contended against Allah and His Messenger: If any contend against Allah and His Messenger, Allah is strict in punishment.

ذلكم فذوقوه وأن للكافرين عذاب النار
Thus (will it be said): "Taste ye then of the (punishment): for those who resist Allah, is the penalty of the Fire."

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إذا لقيتم الذين كفروا زحفا فلا تولوهم الأدبار
O ye who believe! when ye meet the Unbelievers in hostile array, never turn your backs to them.

ومن يولهم يومئذ دبره إلا متحرفا لقتال أو متحيزا إلى فئة فقد باء بغضب من الله ومأواه جهنم وبئس المصير
If any do turn his back to them on such a day - unless it be in a stratagem of war, or to retreat to a troop (of his own)- he draws on himself the wrath of Allah, and his abode is Hell,- an evil refuge (indeed)!

فلم تقتلوهم ولكن الله قتلهم وما رميت إذ رميت ولكن الله رمى وليبلي المؤمنين منه بلاء حسنا إن الله سميع عليم
It is not ye who slew them; it was Allah: when thou threwest (a handful of dust), it was not thy act, but Allah's: in order that He might test the Believers by a gracious trial from Himself: for Allah is He Who heareth and knoweth (all things).

ذلكم وأن الله موهن كيد الكافرين
That, and also because Allah is He Who makes feeble the plans and stratagem of the Unbelievers.

إن تستفتحوا فقد جاءكم الفتح وإن تنتهوا فهو خير لكم وإن تعودوا نعد ولن تغني عنكم فئتكم شيئا ولو كثرت وأن الله مع المؤمنين
(O Unbelievers!) if ye prayed for victory and judgment, now hath the judgment come to you: if ye desist (from wrong), it will be best for you: if ye return (to the attack), so shall We. Not the least good will your forces be to you even if they were multiplied: for verily Allah is with those who believe!

يا أيها الذين آمنوا أطيعوا الله ورسوله ولا تولوا عنه وأنتم تسمعون
O ye who believe! Obey Allah and His Messenger, and turn not away from him when ye hear (him speak).

ولا تكونوا كالذين قالوا سمعنا وهم لا يسمعون
Nor be like those who say, "We hear," but listen not:

إن شر الدواب عند الله الصم البكم الذين لا يعقلون
For the worst of beasts in the sight of Allah are the deaf and the dumb,- those who understand not.

ولو علم الله فيهم خيرا لأسمعهم ولو أسمعهم لتولوا وهم معرضون
If Allah had found in them any good. He would indeed have made them listen: (As it is), if He had made them listen, they would but have turned back and declined (Faith).

يا أيها الذين آمنوا استجيبوا لله وللرسول إذا دعاكم لما يحييكم واعلموا أن الله يحول بين المرء وقلبه وأنه إليه تحشرون
O ye who believe! give your response to Allah and His Messenger, when He calleth you to that which will give you life; and know that Allah cometh in between a man and his heart, and that it is He to Whom ye shall (all) be gathered.

واتقوا فتنة لا تصيبن الذين ظلموا منكم خاصة واعلموا أن الله شديد العقاب
And fear tumult or oppression, which affecteth not in particular (only) those of you who do wrong: and know that Allah is strict in punishment.

واذكروا إذ أنتم قليل مستضعفون في الأرض تخافون أن يتخطفكم الناس فآواكم وأيدكم بنصره ورزقكم من الطيبات لعلكم تشكرون
Call to mind when ye were a small (band), despised through the land, and afraid that men might despoil and kidnap you; But He provided a safe asylum for you, strengthened you with His aid, and gave you Good things for sustenance: that ye might be grateful.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تخونوا الله والرسول وتخونوا أماناتكم وأنتم تعلمون
O ye that believe! betray not the trust of Allah and the Messenger, nor misappropriate knowingly things entrusted to you.

واعلموا أنما أموالكم وأولادكم فتنة وأن الله عنده أجر عظيم
And know ye that your possessions and your progeny are but a trial; and that it is Allah with Whom lies your highest reward.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إن تتقوا الله يجعل لكم فرقانا ويكفر عنكم سيئاتكم ويغفر لكم والله ذو الفضل العظيم
O ye who believe! if ye fear Allah, He will grant you a criterion (to judge between right and wrong), remove from you (all) evil (that may afflict) you, and forgive you: for Allah is the Lord of grace unbounded.

وإذ يمكر بك الذين كفروا ليثبتوك أو يقتلوك أو يخرجوك ويمكرون ويمكر الله والله خير الماكرين
Remember how the Unbelievers plotted against thee, to keep thee in bonds, or slay thee, or get thee out (of thy home). They plot and plan, and Allah too plans; but the best of planners is Allah.

وإذا تتلى عليهم آياتنا قالوا قد سمعنا لو نشاء لقلنا مثل هذا إن هذا إلا أساطير الأولين
When Our Signs are rehearsed to them, they say: "We have heard this (before): if we wished, we could say (words) like these: these are nothing but tales of the ancients."

وإذ قالوا اللهم إن كان هذا هو الحق من عندك فأمطر علينا حجارة من السماء أو ائتنا بعذاب أليم
Remember how they said: "O Allah if this is indeed the Truth from Thee, rain down on us a shower of stones form the sky, or send us a grievous penalty."

وما كان الله ليعذبهم وأنت فيهم وما كان الله معذبهم وهم يستغفرون
But Allah was not going to send them a penalty whilst thou wast amongst them; nor was He going to send it whilst they could ask for pardon.

وما لهم ألا يعذبهم الله وهم يصدون عن المسجد الحرام وما كانوا أولياءه إن أولياؤه إلا المتقون ولكن أكثرهم لا يعلمون
But what plea have they that Allah should not punish them, when they keep out (men) from the sacred Mosque - and they are not its guardians? No men can be its guardians except the righteous; but most of them do not understand.

وما كان صلاتهم عند البيت إلا مكاء وتصدية فذوقوا العذاب بما كنتم تكفرون
Their prayer at the House (of Allah) is nothing but whistling and clapping of hands: (Its only answer can be), "Taste ye the penalty because ye blasphemed."

إن الذين كفروا ينفقون أموالهم ليصدوا عن سبيل الله فسينفقونها ثم تكون عليهم حسرة ثم يغلبون والذين كفروا إلى جهنم يحشرون
The Unbelievers spend their wealth to hinder (man) from the path of Allah, and so will they continue to spend; but in the end they will have (only) regrets and sighs; at length they will be overcome: and the Unbelievers will be gathered together to Hell;-

ليميز الله الخبيث من الطيب ويجعل الخبيث بعضه على بعض فيركمه جميعا فيجعله في جهنم أولئك هم الخاسرون
In order that Allah may separate the impure from the pure, put the impure, one on another, heap them together, and cast them into Hell. They will be the ones to have lost.

قل للذين كفروا إن ينتهوا يغفر لهم ما قد سلف وإن يعودوا فقد مضت سنت الأولين
Say to the Unbelievers, if (now) they desist (from Unbelief), their past would be forgiven them; but if they persist, the punishment of those before them is already (a matter of warning for them).

وقاتلوهم حتى لا تكون فتنة ويكون الدين كله لله فإن انتهوا فإن الله بما يعملون بصير
And fight them on until there is no more tumult or oppression, and there prevail justice and faith in Allah altogether and everywhere; but if they cease, verily Allah doth see all that they do.

وإن تولوا فاعلموا أن الله مولاكم نعم المولى ونعم النصير
If they refuse, be sure that Allah is your Protector - the best to protect and the best to help.

واعلموا أنما غنمتم من شيء فأن لله خمسه وللرسول ولذي القربى واليتامى والمساكين وابن السبيل إن كنتم آمنتم بالله وما أنزلنا على عبدنا يوم الفرقان يوم التقى الجمعان والله على كل شيء قدير
And know that out of all the booty that ye may acquire (in war), a fifth share is assigned to Allah,- and to the Messenger, and to near relatives, orphans, the needy, and the wayfarer,- if ye do believe in Allah and in the revelation We sent down to Our servant on the Day of Testing,- the Day of the meeting of the two forces. For Allah hath power over all things.

إذ أنتم بالعدوة الدنيا وهم بالعدوة القصوى والركب أسفل منكم ولو تواعدتم لاختلفتم في الميعاد ولكن ليقضي الله أمرا كان مفعولا ليهلك من هلك عن بينة ويحيى من حي عن بينة وإن الله لسميع عليم
Remember ye were on the hither side of the valley, and they on the farther side, and the caravan on lower ground than ye. Even if ye had made a mutual appointment to meet, ye would certainly have failed in the appointment: But (thus ye met), that Allah might accomplish a matter already enacted; that those who died might die after a clear Sign (had been given), and those who lived might live after a Clear Sign (had been given). And verily Allah is He Who heareth and knoweth (all things).

إذ يريكهم الله في منامك قليلا ولو أراكهم كثيرا لفشلتم ولتنازعتم في الأمر ولكن الله سلم إنه عليم بذات الصدور
Remember in thy dream Allah showed them to thee as few: if He had shown them to thee as many, ye would surely have been discouraged, and ye would surely have disputed in (your) decision; but Allah saved (you): for He knoweth well the (secrets) of (all) hearts.

وإذ يريكموهم إذ التقيتم في أعينكم قليلا ويقللكم في أعينهم ليقضي الله أمرا كان مفعولا وإلى الله ترجع الأمور
And remember when ye met, He showed them to you as few in your eyes, and He made you appear as contemptible in their eyes: that Allah might accomplish a matter already enacted. For to Allah do all questions go back (for decision).

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إذا لقيتم فئة فاثبتوا واذكروا الله كثيرا لعلكم تفلحون
O ye who believe! When ye meet a force, be firm, and call Allah in remembrance much (and often); that ye may prosper:

وأطيعوا الله ورسوله ولا تنازعوا فتفشلوا وتذهب ريحكم واصبروا إن الله مع الصابرين
And obey Allah and His Messenger; and fall into no disputes, lest ye lose heart and your power depart; and be patient and persevering: For Allah is with those who patiently persevere:

ولا تكونوا كالذين خرجوا من ديارهم بطرا ورئاء الناس ويصدون عن سبيل الله والله بما يعملون محيط
And be not like those who started from their homes insolently and to be seen of men, and to hinder (men) from the path of Allah: For Allah compasseth round about all that they do.

وإذ زين لهم الشيطان أعمالهم وقال لا غالب لكم اليوم من الناس وإني جار لكم فلما تراءت الفئتان نكص على عقبيه وقال إني بريء منكم إني أرى ما لا ترون إني أخاف الله والله شديد العقاب
Remember Satan made their (sinful) acts seem alluring to them, and said: "No one among men can overcome you this day, while I am near to you": But when the two forces came in sight of each other, he turned on his heels, and said: "Lo! I am clear of you; lo! I see what ye see not; Lo! I fear Allah: for Allah is strict in punishment."

إذ يقول المنافقون والذين في قلوبهم مرض غر هؤلاء دينهم ومن يتوكل على الله فإن الله عزيز حكيم
Lo! the hypocrites say, and those in whose hearts is a disease: "These people,- their religion has misled them." But if any trust in Allah, behold! Allah is Exalted in might, Wise.

ولو ترى إذ يتوفى الذين كفروا الملائكة يضربون وجوههم وأدبارهم وذوقوا عذاب الحريق
If thou couldst see, when the angels take the souls of the Unbelievers (at death), (How) they smite their faces and their backs, (saying): "Taste the penalty of the blazing Fire-

ذلك بما قدمت أيديكم وأن الله ليس بظلام للعبيد
"Because of (the deeds) which your (own) hands sent forth; for Allah is never unjust to His servants:

كدأب آل فرعون والذين من قبلهم كفروا بآيات الله فأخذهم الله بذنوبهم إن الله قوي شديد العقاب
"(Deeds) after the manner of the people of Pharaoh and of those before them: They rejected the Signs of Allah, and Allah punished them for their crimes: for Allah is Strong, and Strict in punishment:

ذلك بأن الله لم يك مغيرا نعمة أنعمها على قوم حتى يغيروا ما بأنفسهم وأن الله سميع عليم
"Because Allah will never change the grace which He hath bestowed on a people until they change what is in their (own) souls: and verily Allah is He Who heareth and knoweth (all things)."

كدأب آل فرعون والذين من قبلهم كذبوا بآيات ربهم فأهلكناهم بذنوبهم وأغرقنا آل فرعون وكل كانوا ظالمين
(Deeds) after the manner of the people of Pharaoh and those before them": They treated as false the Signs of their Lord: so We destroyed them for their crimes, and We drowned the people of Pharaoh: for they were all oppressors and wrong-doers.

إن شر الدواب عند الله الذين كفروا فهم لا يؤمنون
For the worst of beasts in the sight of Allah are those who reject Him: They will not believe.

الذين عاهدت منهم ثم ينقضون عهدهم في كل مرة وهم لا يتقون
They are those with whom thou didst make a covenant, but they break their covenant every time, and they have not the fear (of Allah).

فإما تثقفنهم في الحرب فشرد بهم من خلفهم لعلهم يذكرون
If ye gain the mastery over them in war, disperse, with them, those who follow them, that they may remember.

وإما تخافن من قوم خيانة فانبذ إليهم على سواء إن الله لا يحب الخائنين
If thou fearest treachery from any group, throw back (their covenant) to them, (so as to be) on equal terms: for Allah loveth not the treacherous.

ولا يحسبن الذين كفروا سبقوا إنهم لا يعجزون
Let not the unbelievers think that they can get the better (of the godly): they will never frustrate (them).

وأعدوا لهم ما استطعتم من قوة ومن رباط الخيل ترهبون به عدو الله وعدوكم وآخرين من دونهم لا تعلمونهم الله يعلمهم وما تنفقوا من شيء في سبيل الله يوف إليكم وأنتم لا تظلمون
Against them make ready your strength to the utmost of your power, including steeds of war, to strike terror into (the hearts of) the enemies, of Allah and your enemies, and others besides, whom ye may not know, but whom Allah doth know. Whatever ye shall spend in the cause of Allah, shall be repaid unto you, and ye shall not be treated unjustly.

وإن جنحوا للسلم فاجنح لها وتوكل على الله إنه هو السميع العليم
But if the enemy incline towards peace, do thou (also) incline towards peace, and trust in Allah: for He is One that heareth and knoweth (all things).

وإن يريدوا أن يخدعوك فإن حسبك الله هو الذي أيدك بنصره وبالمؤمنين
Should they intend to deceive thee,- verily Allah sufficeth thee: He it is That hath strengthened thee with His aid and with (the company of) the Believers;

وألف بين قلوبهم لو أنفقت ما في الأرض جميعا ما ألفت بين قلوبهم ولكن الله ألف بينهم إنه عزيز حكيم
And (moreover) He hath put affection between their hearts: not if thou hadst spent all that is in the earth, couldst thou have produced that affection, but Allah hath done it: for He is Exalted in might, Wise.

يا أيها النبي حسبك الله ومن اتبعك من المؤمنين
O Prophet! sufficient unto thee is Allah,- (unto thee) and unto those who follow thee among the Believers.

يا أيها النبي حرض المؤمنين على القتال إن يكن منكم عشرون صابرون يغلبوا مائتين وإن يكن منكم مائة يغلبوا ألفا من الذين كفروا بأنهم قوم لا يفقهون
O Prophet! rouse the Believers to the fight. If there are twenty amongst you, patient and persevering, they will vanquish two hundred: if a hundred, they will vanquish a thousand of the Unbelievers: for these are a people without understanding.

الآن خفف الله عنكم وعلم أن فيكم ضعفا فإن يكن منكم مائة صابرة يغلبوا مائتين وإن يكن منكم ألف يغلبوا ألفين بإذن الله والله مع الصابرين
For the present, Allah hath lightened your (task), for He knoweth that there is a weak spot in you: But (even so), if there are a hundred of you, patient and persevering, they will vanquish two hundred, and if a thousand, they will vanquish two thousand, with the leave of Allah: for Allah is with those who patiently persevere.

ما كان لنبي أن يكون له أسرى حتى يثخن في الأرض تريدون عرض الدنيا والله يريد الآخرة والله عزيز حكيم
It is not fitting for a prophet that he should have prisoners of war until he hath thoroughly subdued the land. Ye look for the temporal goods of this world; but Allah looketh to the Hereafter: And Allah is Exalted in might, Wise.

لولا كتاب من الله سبق لمسكم فيما أخذتم عذاب عظيم
Had it not been for a previous ordainment from Allah, a severe penalty would have reached you for the (ransom) that ye took.

فكلوا مما غنمتم حلالا طيبا واتقوا الله إن الله غفور رحيم
But (now) enjoy what ye took in war, lawful and good: but fear Allah: for Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

يا أيها النبي قل لمن في أيديكم من الأسرى إن يعلم الله في قلوبكم خيرا يؤتكم خيرا مما أخذ منكم ويغفر لكم والله غفور رحيم
O Prophet! say to those who are captives in your hands: "If Allah findeth any good in your hearts, He will give you something better than what has been taken from you, and He will forgive you: for Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful."

وإن يريدوا خيانتك فقد خانوا الله من قبل فأمكن منهم والله عليم حكيم
But if they have treacherous designs against thee, (O Messenger!), they have already been in treason against Allah, and so hath He given (thee) power over them. And Allah so He Who hath (full) knowledge and wisdom.

إن الذين آمنوا وهاجروا وجاهدوا بأموالهم وأنفسهم في سبيل الله والذين آووا ونصروا أولئك بعضهم أولياء بعض والذين آمنوا ولم يهاجروا ما لكم من ولايتهم من شيء حتى يهاجروا وإن استنصروكم في الدين فعليكم النصر إلا على قوم بينكم وبينهم ميثاق والله بما تعملون بصير
Those who believed, and adopted exile, and fought for the Faith, with their property and their persons, in the cause of Allah, as well as those who gave (them) asylum and aid,- these are (all) friends and protectors, one of another. As to those who believed but came not into exile, ye owe no duty of protection to them until they come into exile; but if they seek your aid in religion, it is your duty to help them, except against a people with whom ye have a treaty of mutual alliance. And (remember) Allah seeth all that ye do.

والذين كفروا بعضهم أولياء بعض إلا تفعلوه تكن فتنة في الأرض وفساد كبير
The Unbelievers are protectors, one of another: Unless ye do this, (protect each other), there would be tumult and oppression on earth, and great mischief.

والذين آمنوا وهاجروا وجاهدوا في سبيل الله والذين آووا ونصروا أولئك هم المؤمنون حقا لهم مغفرة ورزق كريم
Those who believe, and adopt exile, and fight for the Faith, in the cause of Allah as well as those who give (them) asylum and aid,- these are (all) in very truth the Believers: for them is the forgiveness of sins and a provision most generous.

والذين آمنوا من بعد وهاجروا وجاهدوا معكم فأولئك منكم وأولو الأرحام بعضهم أولى ببعض في كتاب الله إن الله بكل شيء عليم
And those who accept Faith subsequently, and adopt exile, and fight for the Faith in your company,- they are of you. But kindred by blood have prior rights against each other in the Book of Allah. Verily Allah is well-acquainted with all things.

براءة من الله ورسوله إلى الذين عاهدتم من المشركين
A (declaration) of immunity from Allah and His Messenger, to those of the Pagans with whom ye have contracted mutual alliances:-

فسيحوا في الأرض أربعة أشهر واعلموا أنكم غير معجزي الله وأن الله مخزي الكافرين
Go ye, then, for four months, backwards and forwards, (as ye will), throughout the land, but know ye that ye cannot frustrate Allah (by your falsehood) but that Allah will cover with shame those who reject Him.

وأذان من الله ورسوله إلى الناس يوم الحج الأكبر أن الله بريء من المشركين ورسوله فإن تبتم فهو خير لكم وإن توليتم فاعلموا أنكم غير معجزي الله وبشر الذين كفروا بعذاب أليم
And an announcement from Allah and His Messenger, to the people (assembled) on the day of the Great Pilgrimage,- that Allah and His Messenger dissolve (treaty) obligations with the Pagans. If then, ye repent, it were best for you; but if ye turn away, know ye that ye cannot frustrate Allah. And proclaim a grievous penalty to those who reject Faith.

إلا الذين عاهدتم من المشركين ثم لم ينقصوكم شيئا ولم يظاهروا عليكم أحدا فأتموا إليهم عهدهم إلى مدتهم إن الله يحب المتقين
(But the treaties are) not dissolved with those Pagans with whom ye have entered into alliance and who have not subsequently failed you in aught, nor aided any one against you. So fulfil your engagements with them to the end of their term: for Allah loveth the righteous.

فإذا انسلخ الأشهر الحرم فاقتلوا المشركين حيث وجدتموهم وخذوهم واحصروهم واقعدوا لهم كل مرصد فإن تابوا وأقاموا الصلاة وآتوا الزكاة فخلوا سبيلهم إن الله غفور رحيم
But when the forbidden months are past, then fight and slay the Pagans wherever ye find them, an seize them, beleaguer them, and lie in wait for them in every stratagem (of war); but if they repent, and establish regular prayers and practise regular charity, then open the way for them: for Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

وإن أحد من المشركين استجارك فأجره حتى يسمع كلام الله ثم أبلغه مأمنه ذلك بأنهم قوم لا يعلمون
If one amongst the Pagans ask thee for asylum, grant it to him, so that he may hear the word of Allah; and then escort him to where he can be secure. That is because they are men without knowledge.

كيف يكون للمشركين عهد عند الله وعند رسوله إلا الذين عاهدتم عند المسجد الحرام فما استقاموا لكم فاستقيموا لهم إن الله يحب المتقين
How can there be a league, before Allah and His Messenger, with the Pagans, except those with whom ye made a treaty near the sacred Mosque? As long as these stand true to you, stand ye true to them: for Allah doth love the righteous.

كيف وإن يظهروا عليكم لا يرقبوا فيكم إلا ولا ذمة يرضونكم بأفواههم وتأبى قلوبهم وأكثرهم فاسقون
How (can there be such a league), seeing that if they get an advantage over you, they respect not in you the ties either of kinship or of covenant? With (fair words from) their mouths they entice you, but their hearts are averse from you; and most of them are rebellious and wicked.

اشتروا بآيات الله ثمنا قليلا فصدوا عن سبيله إنهم ساء ما كانوا يعملون
The Signs of Allah have they sold for a miserable price, and (many) have they hindered from His way: evil indeed are the deeds they have done.

لا يرقبون في مؤمن إلا ولا ذمة وأولئك هم المعتدون
In a Believer they respect not the ties either of kinship or of covenant! It is they who have transgressed all bounds.

فإن تابوا وأقاموا الصلاة وآتوا الزكاة فإخوانكم في الدين ونفصل الآيات لقوم يعلمون
But (even so), if they repent, establish regular prayers, and practise regular charity,- they are your brethren in Faith: (thus) do We explain the Signs in detail, for those who understand.

وإن نكثوا أيمانهم من بعد عهدهم وطعنوا في دينكم فقاتلوا أئمة الكفر إنهم لا أيمان لهم لعلهم ينتهون
But if they violate their oaths after their covenant, and taunt you for your Faith,- fight ye the chiefs of Unfaith: for their oaths are nothing to them: that thus they may be restrained.

ألا تقاتلون قوما نكثوا أيمانهم وهموا بإخراج الرسول وهم بدءوكم أول مرة أتخشونهم فالله أحق أن تخشوه إن كنتم مؤمنين
Will ye not fight people who violated their oaths, plotted to expel the Messenger, and took the aggressive by being the first (to assault) you? Do ye fear them? Nay, it is Allah Whom ye should more justly fear, if ye believe!

قاتلوهم يعذبهم الله بأيديكم ويخزهم وينصركم عليهم ويشف صدور قوم مؤمنين
Fight them, and Allah will punish them by your hands, cover them with shame, help you (to victory) over them, heal the breasts of Believers,

ويذهب غيظ قلوبهم ويتوب الله على من يشاء والله عليم حكيم
And still the indignation of their hearts. For Allah will turn (in mercy) to whom He will; and Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.

أم حسبتم أن تتركوا ولما يعلم الله الذين جاهدوا منكم ولم يتخذوا من دون الله ولا رسوله ولا المؤمنين وليجة والله خبير بما تعملون
Or think ye that ye shall be abandoned, as though Allah did not know those among you who strive with might and main, and take none for friends and protectors except Allah, His Messenger, and the (community of) Believers? But Allah is well-acquainted with (all) that ye do.

ما كان للمشركين أن يعمروا مساجد الله شاهدين على أنفسهم بالكفر أولئك حبطت أعمالهم وفي النار هم خالدون
It is not for such as join gods with Allah, to visit or maintain the mosques of Allah while they witness against their own souls to infidelity. The works of such bear no fruit: In Fire shall they dwell.

إنما يعمر مساجد الله من آمن بالله واليوم الآخر وأقام الصلاة وآتى الزكاة ولم يخش إلا الله فعسى أولئك أن يكونوا من المهتدين
The mosques of Allah shall be visited and maintained by such as believe in Allah and the Last Day, establish regular prayers, and practise regular charity, and fear none (at all) except Allah. It is they who are expected to be on true guidance.

أجعلتم سقاية الحاج وعمارة المسجد الحرام كمن آمن بالله واليوم الآخر وجاهد في سبيل الله لا يستوون عند الله والله لا يهدي القوم الظالمين
Do ye make the giving of drink to pilgrims, or the maintenance of the Sacred Mosque, equal to (the pious service of) those who believe in Allah and the Last Day, and strive with might and main in the cause of Allah? They are not comparable in the sight of Allah: and Allah guides not those who do wrong.

الذين آمنوا وهاجروا وجاهدوا في سبيل الله بأموالهم وأنفسهم أعظم درجة عند الله وأولئك هم الفائزون
Those who believe, and suffer exile and strive with might and main, in Allah's cause, with their goods and their persons, have the highest rank in the sight of Allah: they are the people who will achieve (salvation).

يبشرهم ربهم برحمة منه ورضوان وجنات لهم فيها نعيم مقيم
Their Lord doth give them glad tidings of a Mercy from Himself, of His good pleasure, and of gardens for them, wherein are delights that endure:

خالدين فيها أبدا إن الله عنده أجر عظيم
They will dwell therein for ever. Verily in Allah's presence is a reward, the greatest (of all).

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تتخذوا آباءكم وإخوانكم أولياء إن استحبوا الكفر على الإيمان ومن يتولهم منكم فأولئك هم الظالمون
O ye who believe! take not for protectors your fathers and your brothers if they love infidelity above Faith: if any of you do so, they do wrong.

قل إن كان آباؤكم وأبناؤكم وإخوانكم وأزواجكم وعشيرتكم وأموال اقترفتموها وتجارة تخشون كسادها ومساكن ترضونها أحب إليكم من الله ورسوله وجهاد في سبيله فتربصوا حتى يأتي الله بأمره والله لا يهدي القوم الفاسقين
Say: If it be that your fathers, your sons, your brothers, your mates, or your kindred; the wealth that ye have gained; the commerce in which ye fear a decline: or the dwellings in which ye delight - are dearer to you than Allah, or His Messenger, or the striving in His cause;- then wait until Allah brings about His decision: and Allah guides not the rebellious.

لقد نصركم الله في مواطن كثيرة ويوم حنين إذ أعجبتكم كثرتكم فلم تغن عنكم شيئا وضاقت عليكم الأرض بما رحبت ثم وليتم مدبرين
Assuredly Allah did help you in many battle-fields and on the day of Hunain: Behold! your great numbers elated you, but they availed you naught: the land, for all that it is wide, did constrain you, and ye turned back in retreat.

ثم أنزل الله سكينته على رسوله وعلى المؤمنين وأنزل جنودا لم تروها وعذب الذين كفروا وذلك جزاء الكافرين
But Allah did pour His calm on the Messenger and on the Believers, and sent down forces which ye saw not: He punished the Unbelievers; thus doth He reward those without Faith.

ثم يتوب الله من بعد ذلك على من يشاء والله غفور رحيم
Again will Allah, after this, turn (in mercy) to whom He will: for Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إنما المشركون نجس فلا يقربوا المسجد الحرام بعد عامهم هذا وإن خفتم عيلة فسوف يغنيكم الله من فضله إن شاء إن الله عليم حكيم
O ye who believe! Truly the Pagans are unclean; so let them not, after this year of theirs, approach the Sacred Mosque. And if ye fear poverty, soon will Allah enrich you, if He wills, out of His bounty, for Allah is All-knowing, All-wise.

قاتلوا الذين لا يؤمنون بالله ولا باليوم الآخر ولا يحرمون ما حرم الله ورسوله ولا يدينون دين الحق من الذين أوتوا الكتاب حتى يعطوا الجزية عن يد وهم صاغرون
Fight those who believe not in Allah nor the Last Day, nor hold that forbidden which hath been forbidden by Allah and His Messenger, nor acknowledge the religion of Truth, (even if they are) of the People of the Book, until they pay the Jizya with willing submission, and feel themselves subdued.

وقالت اليهود عزير ابن الله وقالت النصارى المسيح ابن الله ذلك قولهم بأفواههم يضاهئون قول الذين كفروا من قبل قاتلهم الله أنى يؤفكون
The Jews call 'Uzair a son of Allah, and the Christians call Christ the son of Allah. That is a saying from their mouth; (in this) they but imitate what the unbelievers of old used to say. Allah's curse be on them: how they are deluded away from the Truth!

اتخذوا أحبارهم ورهبانهم أربابا من دون الله والمسيح ابن مريم وما أمروا إلا ليعبدوا إلها واحدا لا إله إلا هو سبحانه عما يشركون
They take their priests and their anchorites to be their lords in derogation of Allah, and (they take as their Lord) Christ the son of Mary; yet they were commanded to worship but One Allah: there is no god but He. Praise and glory to Him: (Far is He) from having the partners they associate (with Him).

يريدون أن يطفئوا نور الله بأفواههم ويأبى الله إلا أن يتم نوره ولو كره الكافرون
Fain would they extinguish Allah's light with their mouths, but Allah will not allow but that His light should be perfected, even though the Unbelievers may detest (it).

هو الذي أرسل رسوله بالهدى ودين الحق ليظهره على الدين كله ولو كره المشركون
It is He Who hath sent His Messenger with guidance and the Religion of Truth, to proclaim it over all religion, even though the Pagans may detest (it).

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إن كثيرا من الأحبار والرهبان ليأكلون أموال الناس بالباطل ويصدون عن سبيل الله والذين يكنزون الذهب والفضة ولا ينفقونها في سبيل الله فبشرهم بعذاب أليم
O ye who believe! there are indeed many among the priests and anchorites, who in Falsehood devour the substance of men and hinder (them) from the way of Allah. And there are those who bury gold and silver and spend it not in the way of Allah: announce unto them a most grievous penalty-

يوم يحمى عليها في نار جهنم فتكوى بها جباههم وجنوبهم وظهورهم هذا ما كنزتم لأنفسكم فذوقوا ما كنتم تكنزون
On the Day when heat will be produced out of that (wealth) in the fire of Hell, and with it will be branded their foreheads, their flanks, and their backs, their flanks, and their backs.- "This is the (treasure) which ye buried for yourselves: taste ye, then, the (treasures) ye buried!"

إن عدة الشهور عند الله اثنا عشر شهرا في كتاب الله يوم خلق السماوات والأرض منها أربعة حرم ذلك الدين القيم فلا تظلموا فيهن أنفسكم وقاتلوا المشركين كافة كما يقاتلونكم كافة واعلموا أن الله مع المتقين
The number of months in the sight of Allah is twelve (in a year)- so ordained by Him the day He created the heavens and the earth; of them four are sacred: that is the straight usage. So wrong not yourselves therein, and fight the Pagans all together as they fight you all together. But know that Allah is with those who restrain themselves.

إنما النسيء زيادة في الكفر يضل به الذين كفروا يحلونه عاما ويحرمونه عاما ليواطئوا عدة ما حرم الله فيحلوا ما حرم الله زين لهم سوء أعمالهم والله لا يهدي القوم الكافرين
Verily the transposing (of a prohibited month) is an addition to Unbelief: the Unbelievers are led to wrong thereby: for they make it lawful one year, and forbidden another year, in order to adjust the number of months forbidden by Allah and make such forbidden ones lawful. The evil of their course seems pleasing to them. But Allah guideth not those who reject Faith.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا ما لكم إذا قيل لكم انفروا في سبيل الله اثاقلتم إلى الأرض أرضيتم بالحياة الدنيا من الآخرة فما متاع الحياة الدنيا في الآخرة إلا قليل
O ye who believe! what is the matter with you, that, when ye are asked to go forth in the cause of Allah, ye cling heavily to the earth? Do ye prefer the life of this world to the Hereafter? But little is the comfort of this life, as compared with the Hereafter.

إلا تنفروا يعذبكم عذابا أليما ويستبدل قوما غيركم ولا تضروه شيئا والله على كل شيء قدير
Unless ye go forth, He will punish you with a grievous penalty, and put others in your place; but Him ye would not harm in the least. For Allah hath power over all things.

إلا تنصروه فقد نصره الله إذ أخرجه الذين كفروا ثاني اثنين إذ هما في الغار إذ يقول لصاحبه لا تحزن إن الله معنا فأنزل الله سكينته عليه وأيده بجنود لم تروها وجعل كلمة الذين كفروا السفلى وكلمة الله هي العليا والله عزيز حكيم
If ye help not (your leader), (it is no matter): for Allah did indeed help him, when the Unbelievers drove him out: he had no more than one companion; they two were in the cave, and he said to his companion, "Have no fear, for Allah is with us": then Allah sent down His peace upon him, and strengthened him with forces which ye saw not, and humbled to the depths the word of the Unbelievers. But the word of Allah is exalted to the heights: for Allah is Exalted in might, Wise.

انفروا خفافا وثقالا وجاهدوا بأموالكم وأنفسكم في سبيل الله ذلكم خير لكم إن كنتم تعلمون
Go ye forth, (whether equipped) lightly or heavily, and strive and struggle, with your goods and your persons, in the cause of Allah. That is best for you, if ye (but) knew.

لو كان عرضا قريبا وسفرا قاصدا لاتبعوك ولكن بعدت عليهم الشقة وسيحلفون بالله لو استطعنا لخرجنا معكم يهلكون أنفسهم والله يعلم إنهم لكاذبون
If there had been immediate gain (in sight), and the journey easy, they would (all) without doubt have followed thee, but the distance was long, (and weighed) on them. They would indeed swear by Allah, "If we only could, we should certainly have come out with you": They would destroy their own souls; for Allah doth know that they are certainly lying.

عفا الله عنك لم أذنت لهم حتى يتبين لك الذين صدقوا وتعلم الكاذبين
Allah give thee grace! why didst thou grant them until those who told the truth were seen by thee in a clear light, and thou hadst proved the liars?

لا يستأذنك الذين يؤمنون بالله واليوم الآخر أن يجاهدوا بأموالهم وأنفسهم والله عليم بالمتقين
Those who believe in Allah and the Last Day ask thee for no exemption from fighting with their goods and persons. And Allah knoweth well those who do their duty.

إنما يستأذنك الذين لا يؤمنون بالله واليوم الآخر وارتابت قلوبهم فهم في ريبهم يترددون
Only those ask thee for exemption who believe not in Allah and the Last Day, and whose hearts are in doubt, so that they are tossed in their doubts to and fro.

ولو أرادوا الخروج لأعدوا له عدة ولكن كره الله انبعاثهم فثبطهم وقيل اقعدوا مع القاعدين
If they had intended to come out, they would certainly have made some preparation therefor; but Allah was averse to their being sent forth; so He made them lag behind, and they were told, "Sit ye among those who sit (inactive)."

لو خرجوا فيكم ما زادوكم إلا خبالا ولأوضعوا خلالكم يبغونكم الفتنة وفيكم سماعون لهم والله عليم بالظالمين
If they had come out with you, they would not have added to your (strength) but only (made for) disorder, hurrying to and fro in your midst and sowing sedition among you, and there would have been some among you who would have listened to them. But Allah knoweth well those who do wrong.

لقد ابتغوا الفتنة من قبل وقلبوا لك الأمور حتى جاء الحق وظهر أمر الله وهم كارهون
Indeed they had plotted sedition before, and upset matters for thee, until,- the Truth arrived, and the Decree of Allah became manifest much to their disgust.

ومنهم من يقول ائذن لي ولا تفتني ألا في الفتنة سقطوا وإن جهنم لمحيطة بالكافرين
Among them is (many) a man who says: "Grant me exemption and draw me not into trial." Have they not fallen into trial already? and indeed Hell surrounds the Unbelievers (on all sides).

إن تصبك حسنة تسؤهم وإن تصبك مصيبة يقولوا قد أخذنا أمرنا من قبل ويتولوا وهم فرحون
If good befalls thee, it grieves them; but if a misfortune befalls thee, they say, "We took indeed our precautions beforehand," and they turn away rejoicing.

قل لن يصيبنا إلا ما كتب الله لنا هو مولانا وعلى الله فليتوكل المؤمنون
Say: "Nothing will happen to us except what Allah has decreed for us: He is our protector": and on Allah let the Believers put their trust.

قل هل تربصون بنا إلا إحدى الحسنيين ونحن نتربص بكم أن يصيبكم الله بعذاب من عنده أو بأيدينا فتربصوا إنا معكم متربصون
Say: "Can you expect for us (any fate) other than one of two glorious things- (Martyrdom or victory)? But we can expect for you either that Allah will send his punishment from Himself, or by our hands. So wait (expectant); we too will wait with you."

قل أنفقوا طوعا أو كرها لن يتقبل منكم إنكم كنتم قوما فاسقين
Say: "Spend (for the cause) willingly or unwillingly: not from you will it be accepted: for ye are indeed a people rebellious and wicked."

وما منعهم أن تقبل منهم نفقاتهم إلا أنهم كفروا بالله وبرسوله ولا يأتون الصلاة إلا وهم كسالى ولا ينفقون إلا وهم كارهون
The only reasons why their contributions are not accepted are: that they reject Allah and His Messenger; that they come to prayer without earnestness; and that they offer contributions unwillingly.

فلا تعجبك أموالهم ولا أولادهم إنما يريد الله ليعذبهم بها في الحياة الدنيا وتزهق أنفسهم وهم كافرون
Let not their wealth nor their (following in) sons dazzle thee: in reality Allah's plan is to punish them with these things in this life, and that their souls may perish in their (very) denial of Allah.

ويحلفون بالله إنهم لمنكم وما هم منكم ولكنهم قوم يفرقون
They swear by Allah that they are indeed of you; but they are not of you: yet they are afraid (to appear in their true colours).

لو يجدون ملجأ أو مغارات أو مدخلا لولوا إليه وهم يجمحون
If they could find a place to flee to, or caves, or a place of concealment, they would turn straightaway thereto, with an obstinate rush.

ومنهم من يلمزك في الصدقات فإن أعطوا منها رضوا وإن لم يعطوا منها إذا هم يسخطون
And among them are men who slander thee in the matter of (the distribution of) the alms: if they are given part thereof, they are pleased, but if not, behold! they are indignant!

ولو أنهم رضوا ما آتاهم الله ورسوله وقالوا حسبنا الله سيؤتينا الله من فضله ورسوله إنا إلى الله راغبون
If only they had been content with what Allah and His Messenger gave them, and had said, "Sufficient unto us is Allah! Allah and His Messenger will soon give us of His bounty: to Allah do we turn our hopes!" (that would have been the right course).

إنما الصدقات للفقراء والمساكين والعاملين عليها والمؤلفة قلوبهم وفي الرقاب والغارمين وفي سبيل الله وابن السبيل فريضة من الله والله عليم حكيم
Alms are for the poor and the needy, and those employed to administer the (funds); for those whose hearts have been (recently) reconciled (to Truth); for those in bondage and in debt; in the cause of Allah; and for the wayfarer: (thus is it) ordained by Allah, and Allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.

ومنهم الذين يؤذون النبي ويقولون هو أذن قل أذن خير لكم يؤمن بالله ويؤمن للمؤمنين ورحمة للذين آمنوا منكم والذين يؤذون رسول الله لهم عذاب أليم
Among them are men who molest the Prophet and say, "He is (all) ear." Say, "He listens to what is best for you: he believes in Allah, has faith in the Believers, and is a Mercy to those of you who believe." But those who molest the Messenger will have a grievous penalty.

يحلفون بالله لكم ليرضوكم والله ورسوله أحق أن يرضوه إن كانوا مؤمنين
To you they swear by Allah. In order to please you: But it is more fitting that they should please Allah and His Messenger, if they are Believers.

ألم يعلموا أنه من يحادد الله ورسوله فأن له نار جهنم خالدا فيها ذلك الخزي العظيم
Know they not that for those who oppose Allah and His Messenger, is the Fire of Hell?- wherein they shall dwell. That is the supreme disgrace.

يحذر المنافقون أن تنزل عليهم سورة تنبئهم بما في قلوبهم قل استهزئوا إن الله مخرج ما تحذرون
The Hypocrites are afraid lest a Sura should be sent down about them, showing them what is (really passing) in their hearts. Say: "Mock ye! But verily Allah will bring to light all that ye fear (should be revealed).

ولئن سألتهم ليقولن إنما كنا نخوض ونلعب قل أبالله وآياته ورسوله كنتم تستهزئون
If thou dost question them, they declare (with emphasis): "We were only talking idly and in play." Say: "Was it at Allah, and His Signs, and His Messenger, that ye were mocking?"

لا تعتذروا قد كفرتم بعد إيمانكم إن نعف عن طائفة منكم نعذب طائفة بأنهم كانوا مجرمين
Make ye no excuses: ye have rejected Faith after ye had accepted it. If We pardon some of you, We will punish others amongst you, for that they are in sin.

المنافقون والمنافقات بعضهم من بعض يأمرون بالمنكر وينهون عن المعروف ويقبضون أيديهم نسوا الله فنسيهم إن المنافقين هم الفاسقون
The Hypocrites, men and women, (have an understanding) with each other: They enjoin evil, and forbid what is just, and are close with their hands. They have forgotten Allah; so He hath forgotten them. Verily the Hypocrites are rebellious and perverse.

وعد الله المنافقين والمنافقات والكفار نار جهنم خالدين فيها هي حسبهم ولعنهم الله ولهم عذاب مقيم
Allah hath promised the Hypocrites men and women, and the rejecters, of Faith, the fire of Hell: Therein shall they dwell: Sufficient is it for them: for them is the curse of Allah, and an enduring punishment,-

كالذين من قبلكم كانوا أشد منكم قوة وأكثر أموالا وأولادا فاستمتعوا بخلاقهم فاستمتعتم بخلاقكم كما استمتع الذين من قبلكم بخلاقهم وخضتم كالذي خاضوا أولئك حبطت أعمالهم في الدنيا والآخرة وأولئك هم الخاسرون
As in the case of those before you: they were mightier than you in power, and more flourishing in wealth and children. They had their enjoyment of their portion: and ye have of yours, as did those before you; and ye indulge in idle talk as they did. They!- their work are fruitless in this world and in the Hereafter, and they will lose (all spiritual good).

ألم يأتهم نبأ الذين من قبلهم قوم نوح وعاد وثمود وقوم إبراهيم وأصحاب مدين والمؤتفكات أتتهم رسلهم بالبينات فما كان الله ليظلمهم ولكن كانوا أنفسهم يظلمون
Hath not the story reached them of those before them?- the People of Noah, and 'Ad, and Thamud; the People of Abraham, the men of Midian, and the cities overthrown. To them came their messengers with clear signs. It is not Allah Who wrongs them, but they wrong their own souls.

والمؤمنون والمؤمنات بعضهم أولياء بعض يأمرون بالمعروف وينهون عن المنكر ويقيمون الصلاة ويؤتون الزكاة ويطيعون الله ورسوله أولئك سيرحمهم الله إن الله عزيز حكيم
The Believers, men and women, are protectors one of another: they enjoin what is just, and forbid what is evil: they observe regular prayers, practise regular charity, and obey Allah and His Messenger. On them will Allah pour His mercy: for Allah is Exalted in power, Wise.

وعد الله المؤمنين والمؤمنات جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها ومساكن طيبة في جنات عدن ورضوان من الله أكبر ذلك هو الفوز العظيم
Allah hath promised to Believers, men and women, gardens under which rivers flow, to dwell therein, and beautiful mansions in gardens of everlasting bliss. But the greatest bliss is the good pleasure of Allah: that is the supreme felicity.

يا أيها النبي جاهد الكفار والمنافقين واغلظ عليهم ومأواهم جهنم وبئس المصير
O Prophet! strive hard against the unbelievers and the Hypocrites, and be firm against them. Their abode is Hell,- an evil refuge indeed.

يحلفون بالله ما قالوا ولقد قالوا كلمة الكفر وكفروا بعد إسلامهم وهموا بما لم ينالوا وما نقموا إلا أن أغناهم الله ورسوله من فضله فإن يتوبوا يك خيرا لهم وإن يتولوا يعذبهم الله عذابا أليما في الدنيا والآخرة وما لهم في الأرض من ولي ولا نصير
They swear by Allah that they said nothing (evil), but indeed they uttered blasphemy, and they did it after accepting Islam; and they meditated a plot which they were unable to carry out: this revenge of theirs was (their) only return for the bounty with which Allah and His Messenger had enriched them! If they repent, it will be best for them; but if they turn back (to their evil ways), Allah will punish them with a grievous penalty in this life and in the Hereafter: They shall have none on earth to protect or help them.

ومنهم من عاهد الله لئن آتانا من فضله لنصدقن ولنكونن من الصالحين
Amongst them are men who made a covenant with Allah, that if He bestowed on them of His bounty, they would give (largely) in charity, and be truly amongst those who are righteous.

فلما آتاهم من فضله بخلوا به وتولوا وهم معرضون
But when He did bestow of His bounty, they became covetous, and turned back (from their covenant), averse (from its fulfilment).

فأعقبهم نفاقا في قلوبهم إلى يوم يلقونه بما أخلفوا الله ما وعدوه وبما كانوا يكذبون
So He hath put as a consequence hypocrisy into their hearts, (to last) till the Day, whereon they shall meet Him: because they broke their covenant with Allah, and because they lied (again and again).

ألم يعلموا أن الله يعلم سرهم ونجواهم وأن الله علام الغيوب
Know they not that Allah doth know their secret (thoughts) and their secret counsels, and that Allah knoweth well all things unseen?

الذين يلمزون المطوعين من المؤمنين في الصدقات والذين لا يجدون إلا جهدهم فيسخرون منهم سخر الله منهم ولهم عذاب أليم
Those who slander such of the believers as give themselves freely to (deeds of) charity, as well as such as can find nothing to give except the fruits of their labour,- and throw ridicule on them,- Allah will throw back their ridicule on them: and they shall have a grievous penalty.

استغفر لهم أو لا تستغفر لهم إن تستغفر لهم سبعين مرة فلن يغفر الله لهم ذلك بأنهم كفروا بالله ورسوله والله لا يهدي القوم الفاسقين
Whether thou ask for their forgiveness, or not, (their sin is unforgivable): if thou ask seventy times for their forgiveness, Allah will not forgive them: because they have rejected Allah and His Messenger: and Allah guideth not those who are perversely rebellious.

فرح المخلفون بمقعدهم خلاف رسول الله وكرهوا أن يجاهدوا بأموالهم وأنفسهم في سبيل الله وقالوا لا تنفروا في الحر قل نار جهنم أشد حرا لو كانوا يفقهون
Those who were left behind (in the Tabuk expedition) rejoiced in their inaction behind the back of the Messenger of Allah: they hated to strive and fight, with their goods and their persons, in the cause of Allah: they said, "Go not forth in the heat." Say, "The fire of Hell is fiercer in heat." If only they could understand!

فليضحكوا قليلا وليبكوا كثيرا جزاء بما كانوا يكسبون
Let them laugh a little: much will they weep: a recompense for the (evil) that they do.

فإن رجعك الله إلى طائفة منهم فاستأذنوك للخروج فقل لن تخرجوا معي أبدا ولن تقاتلوا معي عدوا إنكم رضيتم بالقعود أول مرة فاقعدوا مع الخالفين
If, then, Allah bring thee back to any of them, and they ask thy permission to come out (with thee), say: "Never shall ye come out with me, nor fight an enemy with me: for ye preferred to sit inactive on the first occasion: Then sit ye (now) with those who lag behind."

ولا تصل على أحد منهم مات أبدا ولا تقم على قبره إنهم كفروا بالله ورسوله وماتوا وهم فاسقون
Nor do thou ever pray for any of them that dies, nor stand at his grave; for they rejected Allah and His Messenger, and died in a state of perverse rebellion.

ولا تعجبك أموالهم وأولادهم إنما يريد الله أن يعذبهم بها في الدنيا وتزهق أنفسهم وهم كافرون
Nor let their wealth nor their (following in) sons dazzle thee: Allah's plan is to punish them with these things in this world, and that their souls may perish in their (very) denial of Allah.

وإذا أنزلت سورة أن آمنوا بالله وجاهدوا مع رسوله استأذنك أولو الطول منهم وقالوا ذرنا نكن مع القاعدين
When a Sura comes down, enjoining them to believe in Allah and to strive and fight along with His Messenger, those with wealth and influence among them ask thee for exemption, and say: "Leave us (behind): we would be with those who sit (at home)."

رضوا بأن يكونوا مع الخوالف وطبع على قلوبهم فهم لا يفقهون
They prefer to be with (the women), who remain behind (at home): their hearts are sealed and so they understand not.

لكن الرسول والذين آمنوا معه جاهدوا بأموالهم وأنفسهم وأولئك لهم الخيرات وأولئك هم المفلحون
But the Messenger, and those who believe with him, strive and fight with their wealth and their persons: for them are (all) good things: and it is they who will prosper.

أعد الله لهم جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها ذلك الفوز العظيم
Allah hath prepared for them gardens under which rivers flow, to dwell therein: that is the supreme felicity.

وجاء المعذرون من الأعراب ليؤذن لهم وقعد الذين كذبوا الله ورسوله سيصيب الذين كفروا منهم عذاب أليم
And there were, among the desert Arabs (also), men who made excuses and came to claim exemption; and those who were false to Allah and His Messenger (merely) sat inactive. Soon will a grievous penalty seize the Unbelievers among them.

ليس على الضعفاء ولا على المرضى ولا على الذين لا يجدون ما ينفقون حرج إذا نصحوا لله ورسوله ما على المحسنين من سبيل والله غفور رحيم
There is no blame on those who are infirm, or ill, or who find no resources to spend (on the cause), if they are sincere (in duty) to Allah and His Messenger: no ground (of complaint) can there be against such as do right: and Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

ولا على الذين إذا ما أتوك لتحملهم قلت لا أجد ما أحملكم عليه تولوا وأعينهم تفيض من الدمع حزنا ألا يجدوا ما ينفقون
Nor (is there blame) on those who came to thee to be provided with mounts, and when thou saidst, "I can find no mounts for you," they turned back, their eyes streaming with tears of grief that they had no resources wherewith to provide the expenses.

إنما السبيل على الذين يستأذنونك وهم أغنياء رضوا بأن يكونوا مع الخوالف وطبع الله على قلوبهم فهم لا يعلمون
The ground (of complaint) is against such as claim exemption while they are rich. They prefer to stay with the (women) who remain behind: Allah hath sealed their hearts; so they know not (What they miss).

يعتذرون إليكم إذا رجعتم إليهم قل لا تعتذروا لن نؤمن لكم قد نبأنا الله من أخباركم وسيرى الله عملكم ورسوله ثم تردون إلى عالم الغيب والشهادة فينبئكم بما كنتم تعملون
They will present their excuses to you when ye return to them. Say thou: "Present no excuses: we shall not believe you: Allah hath already informed us of the true state of matters concerning you: It is your actions that Allah and His Messenger will observe: in the end will ye be brought back to Him Who knoweth what is hidden and what is open: then will He show you the truth of all that ye did."

سيحلفون بالله لكم إذا انقلبتم إليهم لتعرضوا عنهم فأعرضوا عنهم إنهم رجس ومأواهم جهنم جزاء بما كانوا يكسبون
They will swear to you by Allah, when ye return to them, that ye may leave them alone. So leave them alone: For they are an abomination, and Hell is their dwelling-place,-a fitting recompense for the (evil) that they did.

يحلفون لكم لترضوا عنهم فإن ترضوا عنهم فإن الله لا يرضى عن القوم الفاسقين
They will swear unto you, that ye may be pleased with them but if ye are pleased with them, Allah is not pleased with those who disobey.

الأعراب أشد كفرا ونفاقا وأجدر ألا يعلموا حدود ما أنزل الله على رسوله والله عليم حكيم
The Arabs of the desert are the worst in Unbelief and hypocrisy, and most fitted to be in ignorance of the command which Allah hath sent down to His Messenger: But Allah is All-knowing, All-Wise.

ومن الأعراب من يتخذ ما ينفق مغرما ويتربص بكم الدوائر عليهم دائرة السوء والله سميع عليم
Some of the desert Arabs look upon their payments as a fine, and watch for disasters for you: on them be the disaster of evil: for Allah is He That heareth and knoweth (all things).

ومن الأعراب من يؤمن بالله واليوم الآخر ويتخذ ما ينفق قربات عند الله وصلوات الرسول ألا إنها قربة لهم سيدخلهم الله في رحمته إن الله غفور رحيم
But some of the desert Arabs believe in Allah and the Last Day, and look on their payments as pious gifts bringing them nearer to Allah and obtaining the prayers of the Messenger. Aye, indeed they bring them nearer (to Him): soon will Allah admit them to His Mercy: for Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

والسابقون الأولون من المهاجرين والأنصار والذين اتبعوهم بإحسان رضي الله عنهم ورضوا عنه وأعد لهم جنات تجري تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها أبدا ذلك الفوز العظيم
The vanguard (of Islam)- the first of those who forsook (their homes) and of those who gave them aid, and (also) those who follow them in (all) good deeds,- well-pleased is Allah with them, as are they with Him: for them hath He prepared gardens under which rivers flow, to dwell therein for ever: that is the supreme felicity.

وممن حولكم من الأعراب منافقون ومن أهل المدينة مردوا على النفاق لا تعلمهم نحن نعلمهم سنعذبهم مرتين ثم يردون إلى عذاب عظيم
Certain of the desert Arabs round about you are hypocrites, as well as (desert Arabs) among the Medina folk: they are obstinate in hypocrisy: thou knowest them not: We know them: twice shall We punish them: and in addition shall they be sent to a grievous penalty.

وآخرون اعترفوا بذنوبهم خلطوا عملا صالحا وآخر سيئا عسى الله أن يتوب عليهم إن الله غفور رحيم
Others (there are who) have acknowledged their wrong-doings: they have mixed an act that was good with another that was evil. Perhaps Allah will turn unto them (in Mercy): for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

خذ من أموالهم صدقة تطهرهم وتزكيهم بها وصل عليهم إن صلاتك سكن لهم والله سميع عليم
Of their goods, take alms, that so thou mightest purify and sanctify them; and pray on their behalf. Verily thy prayers are a source of security for them: And Allah is One Who heareth and knoweth.

ألم يعلموا أن الله هو يقبل التوبة عن عباده ويأخذ الصدقات وأن الله هو التواب الرحيم
Know they not that Allah doth accept repentance from His votaries and receives their gifts of charity, and that Allah is verily He, the Oft-Returning, Most Merciful?

وقل اعملوا فسيرى الله عملكم ورسوله والمؤمنون وستردون إلى عالم الغيب والشهادة فينبئكم بما كنتم تعملون
And say: "Work (righteousness): Soon will Allah observe your work, and His Messenger, and the Believers: Soon will ye be brought back to the knower of what is hidden and what is open: then will He show you the truth of all that ye did."

وآخرون مرجون لأمر الله إما يعذبهم وإما يتوب عليهم والله عليم حكيم
There are (yet) others, held in suspense for the command of Allah, whether He will punish them, or turn in mercy to them: and Allah is All-Knowing, Wise.

والذين اتخذوا مسجدا ضرارا وكفرا وتفريقا بين المؤمنين وإرصادا لمن حارب الله ورسوله من قبل وليحلفن إن أردنا إلا الحسنى والله يشهد إنهم لكاذبون
And there are those who put up a mosque by way of mischief and infidelity - to disunite the Believers - and in preparation for one who warred against Allah and His Messenger aforetime. They will indeed swear that their intention is nothing but good; But Allah doth declare that they are certainly liars.

لا تقم فيه أبدا لمسجد أسس على التقوى من أول يوم أحق أن تقوم فيه فيه رجال يحبون أن يتطهروا والله يحب المطهرين
Never stand thou forth therein. There is a mosque whose foundation was laid from the first day on piety; it is more worthy of the standing forth (for prayer) therein. In it are men who love to be purified; and Allah loveth those who make themselves pure.

أفمن أسس بنيانه على تقوى من الله ورضوان خير أم من أسس بنيانه على شفا جرف هار فانهار به في نار جهنم والله لا يهدي القوم الظالمين
Which then is best? - he that layeth his foundation on piety to Allah and His good pleasure? - or he that layeth his foundation on an undermined sand-cliff ready to crumble to pieces? and it doth crumble to pieces with him, into the fire of Hell. And Allah guideth not people that do wrong.

لا يزال بنيانهم الذي بنوا ريبة في قلوبهم إلا أن تقطع قلوبهم والله عليم حكيم
The foundation of those who so build is never free from suspicion and shakiness in their hearts, until their hearts are cut to pieces. And Allah is All-Knowing, Wise.

إن الله اشترى من المؤمنين أنفسهم وأموالهم بأن لهم الجنة يقاتلون في سبيل الله فيقتلون ويقتلون وعدا عليه حقا في التوراة والإنجيل والقرآن ومن أوفى بعهده من الله فاستبشروا ببيعكم الذي بايعتم به وذلك هو الفوز العظيم
Allah hath purchased of the believers their persons and their goods; for theirs (in return) is the garden (of Paradise): they fight in His cause, and slay and are slain: a promise binding on Him in truth, through the Law, the Gospel, and the Qur'an: and who is more faithful to his covenant than Allah? then rejoice in the bargain which ye have concluded: that is the achievement supreme.

التائبون العابدون الحامدون السائحون الراكعون الساجدون الآمرون بالمعروف والناهون عن المنكر والحافظون لحدود الله وبشر المؤمنين
Those that turn (to Allah) in repentance; that serve Him, and praise Him; that wander in devotion to the cause of Allah,: that bow down and prostrate themselves in prayer; that enjoin good and forbid evil; and observe the limit set by Allah;- (These do rejoice). So proclaim the glad tidings to the Believers.

ما كان للنبي والذين آمنوا أن يستغفروا للمشركين ولو كانوا أولي قربى من بعد ما تبين لهم أنهم أصحاب الجحيم
It is not fitting, for the Prophet and those who believe, that they should pray for forgiveness for Pagans, even though they be of kin, after it is clear to them that they are companions of the Fire.

وما كان استغفار إبراهيم لأبيه إلا عن موعدة وعدها إياه فلما تبين له أنه عدو لله تبرأ منه إن إبراهيم لأواه حليم
And Abraham prayed for his father's forgiveness only because of a promise he had made to him. But when it became clear to him that he was an enemy to Allah, he dissociated himself from him: for Abraham was most tender-hearted, forbearing.

وما كان الله ليضل قوما بعد إذ هداهم حتى يبين لهم ما يتقون إن الله بكل شيء عليم
And Allah will not mislead a people after He hath guided them, in order that He may make clear to them what to fear (and avoid)- for Allah hath knowledge of all things.

إن الله له ملك السماوات والأرض يحيي ويميت وما لكم من دون الله من ولي ولا نصير
Unto Allah belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth. He giveth life and He taketh it. Except for Him ye have no protector nor helper.

لقد تاب الله على النبي والمهاجرين والأنصار الذين اتبعوه في ساعة العسرة من بعد ما كاد يزيغ قلوب فريق منهم ثم تاب عليهم إنه بهم رءوف رحيم
Allah turned with favour to the Prophet, the Muhajirs, and the Ansar,- who followed him in a time of distress, after that the hearts of a part of them had nearly swerved (from duty); but He turned to them (also): for He is unto them Most Kind, Most Merciful.

وعلى الثلاثة الذين خلفوا حتى إذا ضاقت عليهم الأرض بما رحبت وضاقت عليهم أنفسهم وظنوا أن لا ملجأ من الله إلا إليه ثم تاب عليهم ليتوبوا إن الله هو التواب الرحيم
(He turned in mercy also) to the three who were left behind; (they felt guilty) to such a degree that the earth seemed constrained to them, for all its spaciousness, and their (very) souls seemed straitened to them,- and they perceived that there is no fleeing from Allah (and no refuge) but to Himself. Then He turned to them, that they might repent: for Allah is Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا اتقوا الله وكونوا مع الصادقين
O ye who believe! Fear Allah and be with those who are true (in word and deed).

ما كان لأهل المدينة ومن حولهم من الأعراب أن يتخلفوا عن رسول الله ولا يرغبوا بأنفسهم عن نفسه ذلك بأنهم لا يصيبهم ظمأ ولا نصب ولا مخمصة في سبيل الله ولا يطئون موطئا يغيظ الكفار ولا ينالون من عدو نيلا إلا كتب لهم به عمل صالح إن الله لا يضيع أجر المحسنين
It was not fitting for the people of Medina and the Bedouin Arabs of the neighbourhood, to refuse to follow Allah's Messenger, nor to prefer their own lives to his: because nothing could they suffer or do, but was reckoned to their credit as a deed of righteousness,- whether they suffered thirst, or fatigue, or hunger, in the cause of Allah, or trod paths to raise the ire of the Unbelievers, or received any injury whatever from an enemy: for Allah suffereth not the reward to be lost of those who do good;-

ولا ينفقون نفقة صغيرة ولا كبيرة ولا يقطعون واديا إلا كتب لهم ليجزيهم الله أحسن ما كانوا يعملون
Nor could they spend anything (for the cause) - small or great- nor cut across a valley, but the deed is inscribed to their credit: that Allah may requite their deed with the best (possible reward).

وما كان المؤمنون لينفروا كافة فلولا نفر من كل فرقة منهم طائفة ليتفقهوا في الدين ولينذروا قومهم إذا رجعوا إليهم لعلهم يحذرون
Nor should the Believers all go forth together: if a contingent from every expedition remained behind, they could devote themselves to studies in religion, and admonish the people when they return to them,- that thus they (may learn) to guard themselves (against evil).

يا أيها الذين آمنوا قاتلوا الذين يلونكم من الكفار وليجدوا فيكم غلظة واعلموا أن الله مع المتقين
O ye who believe! fight the unbelievers who gird you about, and let them find firmness in you: and know that Allah is with those who fear Him.

وإذا ما أنزلت سورة فمنهم من يقول أيكم زادته هذه إيمانا فأما الذين آمنوا فزادتهم إيمانا وهم يستبشرون
Whenever there cometh down a sura, some of them say: "Which of you has had His faith increased by it?" Yea, those who believe,- their faith is increased and they do rejoice.

وأما الذين في قلوبهم مرض فزادتهم رجسا إلى رجسهم وماتوا وهم كافرون
But those in whose hearts is a disease,- it will add doubt to their doubt, and they will die in a state of Unbelief.

أولا يرون أنهم يفتنون في كل عام مرة أو مرتين ثم لا يتوبون ولا هم يذكرون
See they not that they are tried every year once or twice? Yet they turn not in repentance, and they take no heed.

وإذا ما أنزلت سورة نظر بعضهم إلى بعض هل يراكم من أحد ثم انصرفوا صرف الله قلوبهم بأنهم قوم لا يفقهون
Whenever there cometh down a Sura, they look at each other, (saying), "Doth anyone see you?" Then they turn aside: Allah hath turned their hearts (from the light); for they are a people that understand not.

لقد جاءكم رسول من أنفسكم عزيز عليه ما عنتم حريص عليكم بالمؤمنين رءوف رحيم
Now hath come unto you a Messenger from amongst yourselves: it grieves him that ye should perish: ardently anxious is he over you: to the Believers is he most kind and merciful.

فإن تولوا فقل حسبي الله لا إله إلا هو عليه توكلت وهو رب العرش العظيم
But if they turn away, Say: "Allah sufficeth me: there is no god but He: On Him is my trust,- He the Lord of the Throne (of Glory) Supreme!"

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الر تلك آيات الكتاب الحكيم
A. L. R. These are the ayats of the Book of Wisdom.

أكان للناس عجبا أن أوحينا إلى رجل منهم أن أنذر الناس وبشر الذين آمنوا أن لهم قدم صدق عند ربهم قال الكافرون إن هذا لساحر مبين
Is it a matter of wonderment to men that We have sent Our inspiration to a man from among themselves?- that he should warn mankind (of their danger), and give the good news to the Believers that they have before their Lord the lofty rank of truth. (But) say the Unbelievers: "This is indeed an evident sorcerer!"

إن ربكم الله الذي خلق السماوات والأرض في ستة أيام ثم استوى على العرش يدبر الأمر ما من شفيع إلا من بعد إذنه ذلكم الله ربكم فاعبدوه أفلا تذكرون
Verily your Lord is Allah, who created the heavens and the earth in six days, and is firmly established on the throne (of authority), regulating and governing all things. No intercessor (can plead with Him) except after His leave (hath been obtained). This is Allah your Lord; Him therefore serve ye: will ye not receive admonition?

إليه مرجعكم جميعا وعد الله حقا إنه يبدأ الخلق ثم يعيده ليجزي الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات بالقسط والذين كفروا لهم شراب من حميم وعذاب أليم بما كانوا يكفرون
To Him will be your return- of all of you. The promise of Allah is true and sure. It is He Who beginneth the process of creation, and repeateth it, that He may reward with justice those who believe and work righteousness; but those who reject Him will have draughts of boiling fluids, and a penalty grievous, because they did reject Him.

هو الذي جعل الشمس ضياء والقمر نورا وقدره منازل لتعلموا عدد السنين والحساب ما خلق الله ذلك إلا بالحق يفصل الآيات لقوم يعلمون
It is He Who made the sun to be a shining glory and the moon to be a light (of beauty), and measured out stages for her; that ye might know the number of years and the count (of time). Nowise did Allah create this but in truth and righteousness. (Thus) doth He explain His Signs in detail, for those who understand.

إن في اختلاف الليل والنهار وما خلق الله في السماوات والأرض لآيات لقوم يتقون
Verily, in the alternation of the night and the day, and in all that Allah hath created, in the heavens and the earth, are signs for those who fear Him.

إن الذين لا يرجون لقاءنا ورضوا بالحياة الدنيا واطمأنوا بها والذين هم عن آياتنا غافلون
Those who rest not their hope on their meeting with Us, but are pleased and satisfied with the life of the present, and those who heed not Our Signs,-

أولئك مأواهم النار بما كانوا يكسبون
Their abode is the Fire, because of the (evil) they earned.

إن الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات يهديهم ربهم بإيمانهم تجري من تحتهم الأنهار في جنات النعيم
Those who believe, and work righteousness,- their Lord will guide them because of their faith: beneath them will flow rivers in gardens of bliss.

دعواهم فيها سبحانك اللهم وتحيتهم فيها سلام وآخر دعواهم أن الحمد لله رب العالمين
(This will be) their cry therein: "Glory to Thee, O Allah!" And "Peace" will be their greeting therein! and the close of their cry will be: "Praise be to Allah, the Cherisher and Sustainer of the worlds!"

ولو يعجل الله للناس الشر استعجالهم بالخير لقضي إليهم أجلهم فنذر الذين لا يرجون لقاءنا في طغيانهم يعمهون
If Allah were to hasten for men the ill (they have earned) as they would fain hasten on the good,- then would their respite be settled at once. But We leave those who rest not their hope on their meeting with Us, in their trespasses, wandering in distraction to and fro.

وإذا مس الإنسان الضر دعانا لجنبه أو قاعدا أو قائما فلما كشفنا عنه ضره مر كأن لم يدعنا إلى ضر مسه كذلك زين للمسرفين ما كانوا يعملون
When trouble toucheth a man, He crieth unto Us (in all postures)- lying down on his side, or sitting, or standing. But when We have solved his trouble, he passeth on his way as if he had never cried to Us for a trouble that touched him! thus do the deeds of transgressors seem fair in their eyes!

ولقد أهلكنا القرون من قبلكم لما ظلموا وجاءتهم رسلهم بالبينات وما كانوا ليؤمنوا كذلك نجزي القوم المجرمين
Generations before you We destroyed when they did wrong: their messengers came to them with clear-signs, but they would not believe! thus do We requite those who sin!

ثم جعلناكم خلائف في الأرض من بعدهم لننظر كيف تعملون
Then We made you heirs in the land after them, to see how ye would behave!

وإذا تتلى عليهم آياتنا بينات قال الذين لا يرجون لقاءنا ائت بقرآن غير هذا أو بدله قل ما يكون لي أن أبدله من تلقاء نفسي إن أتبع إلا ما يوحى إلي إني أخاف إن عصيت ربي عذاب يوم عظيم
But when Our Clear Signs are rehearsed unto them, those who rest not their hope on their meeting with Us, Say: "Bring us a reading other than this, or change this," Say: "It is not for me, of my own accord, to change it: I follow naught but what is revealed unto me: if I were to disobey my Lord, I should myself fear the penalty of a Great Day (to come)."

قل لو شاء الله ما تلوته عليكم ولا أدراكم به فقد لبثت فيكم عمرا من قبله أفلا تعقلون
Say: "If Allah had so willed, I should not have rehearsed it to you, nor would He have made it known to you. A whole life-time before this have I tarried amongst you: will ye not then understand?"

فمن أظلم ممن افترى على الله كذبا أو كذب بآياته إنه لا يفلح المجرمون
Who doth more wrong than such as forge a lie against Allah, or deny His Signs? But never will prosper those who sin.

ويعبدون من دون الله ما لا يضرهم ولا ينفعهم ويقولون هؤلاء شفعاؤنا عند الله قل أتنبئون الله بما لا يعلم في السماوات ولا في الأرض سبحانه وتعالى عما يشركون
They serve, besides Allah, things that hurt them not nor profit them, and they say: "These are our intercessors with Allah." Say: "Do ye indeed inform Allah of something He knows not, in the heavens or on earth?- Glory to Him! and far is He above the partners they ascribe (to Him)!"

وما كان الناس إلا أمة واحدة فاختلفوا ولولا كلمة سبقت من ربك لقضي بينهم فيما فيه يختلفون
Mankind was but one nation, but differed (later). Had it not been for a word that went forth before from thy Lord, their differences would have been settled between them.

ويقولون لولا أنزل عليه آية من ربه فقل إنما الغيب لله فانتظروا إني معكم من المنتظرين
They say: "Why is not a sign sent down to him from his Lord?" Say: "The Unseen is only for Allah (to know), then wait ye: I too will wait with you."

وإذا أذقنا الناس رحمة من بعد ضراء مستهم إذا لهم مكر في آياتنا قل الله أسرع مكرا إن رسلنا يكتبون ما تمكرون
When We make mankind taste of some mercy after adversity hath touched them, behold! they take to plotting against Our Signs! Say: "Swifter to plan is Allah!" Verily, Our messengers record all the plots that ye make!

هو الذي يسيركم في البر والبحر حتى إذا كنتم في الفلك وجرين بهم بريح طيبة وفرحوا بها جاءتها ريح عاصف وجاءهم الموج من كل مكان وظنوا أنهم أحيط بهم دعوا الله مخلصين له الدين لئن أنجيتنا من هذه لنكونن من الشاكرين
He it is Who enableth you to traverse through land and sea; so that ye even board ships;- they sail with them with a favourable wind, and they rejoice thereat; then comes a stormy wind and the waves come to them from all sides, and they think they are being overwhelmed: they cry unto Allah, sincerely offering (their) duty unto Him saying, "If thou dost deliver us from this, we shall truly show our gratitude!"

فلما أنجاهم إذا هم يبغون في الأرض بغير الحق يا أيها الناس إنما بغيكم على أنفسكم متاع الحياة الدنيا ثم إلينا مرجعكم فننبئكم بما كنتم تعملون
But when he delivereth them, behold! they transgress insolently through the earth in defiance of right! O mankind! your insolence is against your own souls,- an enjoyment of the life of the present: in the end, to Us is your return, and We shall show you the truth of all that ye did.

إنما مثل الحياة الدنيا كماء أنزلناه من السماء فاختلط به نبات الأرض مما يأكل الناس والأنعام حتى إذا أخذت الأرض زخرفها وازينت وظن أهلها أنهم قادرون عليها أتاها أمرنا ليلا أو نهارا فجعلناها حصيدا كأن لم تغن بالأمس كذلك نفصل الآيات لقوم يتفكرون
The likeness of the life of the present is as the rain which We send down from the skies: by its mingling arises the produce of the earth- which provides food for men and animals: (It grows) till the earth is clad with its golden ornaments and is decked out (in beauty): the people to whom it belongs think they have all powers of disposal over it: There reaches it Our command by night or by day, and We make it like a harvest clean-mown, as if it had not flourished only the day before! thus do We explain the Signs in detail for those who reflect.

والله يدعو إلى دار السلام ويهدي من يشاء إلى صراط مستقيم
But Allah doth call to the Home of Peace: He doth guide whom He pleaseth to a way that is straight.

للذين أحسنوا الحسنى وزيادة ولا يرهق وجوههم قتر ولا ذلة أولئك أصحاب الجنة هم فيها خالدون
To those who do right is a goodly (reward)- Yea, more (than in measure)! No darkness nor shame shall cover their faces! they are companions of the garden; they will abide therein (for aye)!

والذين كسبوا السيئات جزاء سيئة بمثلها وترهقهم ذلة ما لهم من الله من عاصم كأنما أغشيت وجوههم قطعا من الليل مظلما أولئك أصحاب النار هم فيها خالدون
But those who have earned evil will have a reward of like evil: ignominy will cover their (faces): No defender will they have from (the wrath of) Allah: Their faces will be covered, as it were, with pieces from the depth of the darkness of night: they are companions of the Fire: they will abide therein (for aye)!

ويوم نحشرهم جميعا ثم نقول للذين أشركوا مكانكم أنتم وشركاؤكم فزيلنا بينهم وقال شركاؤهم ما كنتم إيانا تعبدون
One day shall We gather them all together. Then shall We say to those who joined gods (with Us): "To your place! ye and those ye joined as 'partners' We shall separate them, and their "Partners" shall say: "It was not us that ye worshipped!

فكفى بالله شهيدا بيننا وبينكم إن كنا عن عبادتكم لغافلين
"Enough is Allah for a witness between us and you: we certainly knew nothing of your worship of us!"

هنالك تبلو كل نفس ما أسلفت وردوا إلى الله مولاهم الحق وضل عنهم ما كانوا يفترون
There will every soul prove (the fruits of) the deeds it sent before: they will be brought back to Allah their rightful Lord, and their invented falsehoods will leave them in the lurch.

قل من يرزقكم من السماء والأرض أمن يملك السمع والأبصار ومن يخرج الحي من الميت ويخرج الميت من الحي ومن يدبر الأمر فسيقولون الله فقل أفلا تتقون
Say: "Who is it that sustains you (in life) from the sky and from the earth? or who is it that has power over hearing and sight? And who is it that brings out the living from the dead and the dead from the living? and who is it that rules and regulates all affairs?" They will soon say, "Allah". Say, "will ye not then show piety (to Him)?"

فذلكم الله ربكم الحق فماذا بعد الحق إلا الضلال فأنى تصرفون
Such is Allah, your real Cherisher and Sustainer: apart from truth, what (remains) but error? How then are ye turned away?

كذلك حقت كلمت ربك على الذين فسقوا أنهم لا يؤمنون
Thus is the word of thy Lord proved true against those who rebel: Verily they will not believe.

قل هل من شركائكم من يبدأ الخلق ثم يعيده قل الله يبدأ الخلق ثم يعيده فأنى تؤفكون
Say: "Of your 'partners', can any originate creation and repeat it?" Say: "It is Allah Who originates creation and repeats it: then how are ye deluded away (from the truth)?"

قل هل من شركائكم من يهدي إلى الحق قل الله يهدي للحق أفمن يهدي إلى الحق أحق أن يتبع أمن لا يهدي إلا أن يهدى فما لكم كيف تحكمون
Say: "Of your 'partners' is there any that can give any guidance towards truth?" Say: "It is Allah Who gives guidance towards truth, is then He Who gives guidance to truth more worthy to be followed, or he who finds not guidance (himself) unless he is guided? what then is the matter with you? How judge ye?"

وما يتبع أكثرهم إلا ظنا إن الظن لا يغني من الحق شيئا إن الله عليم بما يفعلون
But most of them follow nothing but fancy: truly fancy can be of no avail against truth. Verily Allah is well aware of all that they do.

وما كان هذا القرآن أن يفترى من دون الله ولكن تصديق الذي بين يديه وتفصيل الكتاب لا ريب فيه من رب العالمين
This Qur'an is not such as can be produced by other than Allah; on the contrary it is a confirmation of (revelations) that went before it, and a fuller explanation of the Book - wherein there is no doubt - from the Lord of the worlds.

أم يقولون افتراه قل فأتوا بسورة مثله وادعوا من استطعتم من دون الله إن كنتم صادقين
Or do they say, "He forged it"? say: "Bring then a Sura like unto it, and call (to your aid) anyone you can besides Allah, if it be ye speak the truth!"

بل كذبوا بما لم يحيطوا بعلمه ولما يأتهم تأويله كذلك كذب الذين من قبلهم فانظر كيف كان عاقبة الظالمين
Nay, they charge with falsehood that whose knowledge they cannot compass, even before the elucidation thereof hath reached them: thus did those before them make charges of falsehood: but see what was the end of those who did wrong!

ومنهم من يؤمن به ومنهم من لا يؤمن به وربك أعلم بالمفسدين
Of them there are some who believe therein, and some who do not: and thy Lord knoweth best those who are out for mischief.

وإن كذبوك فقل لي عملي ولكم عملكم أنتم بريئون مما أعمل وأنا بريء مما تعملون
If they charge thee with falsehood, say: "My work to me, and yours to you! ye are free from responsibility for what I do, and I for what ye do!"

ومنهم من يستمعون إليك أفأنت تسمع الصم ولو كانوا لا يعقلون
Among them are some who (pretend to) listen to thee: But canst thou make the deaf to hear,- even though they are without understanding?

ومنهم من ينظر إليك أفأنت تهدي العمي ولو كانوا لا يبصرون
And among them are some who look at thee: but canst thou guide the blind,- even though they will not see?

إن الله لا يظلم الناس شيئا ولكن الناس أنفسهم يظلمون
Verily Allah will not deal unjustly with man in aught: It is man that wrongs his own soul.

ويوم يحشرهم كأن لم يلبثوا إلا ساعة من النهار يتعارفون بينهم قد خسر الذين كذبوا بلقاء الله وما كانوا مهتدين
One day He will gather them together: (It will be) as if they had tarried but an hour of a day: they will recognise each other: assuredly those will be lost who denied the meeting with Allah and refused to receive true guidance.

وإما نرينك بعض الذي نعدهم أو نتوفينك فإلينا مرجعهم ثم الله شهيد على ما يفعلون
Whether We show thee (realised in thy life-time) some part of what We promise them,- or We take thy soul (to Our Mercy) (Before that),- in any case, to Us is their return: ultimately Allah is witness, to all that they do.

ولكل أمة رسول فإذا جاء رسولهم قضي بينهم بالقسط وهم لا يظلمون
To every people (was sent) a messenger: when their messenger comes (before them), the matter will be judged between them with justice, and they will not be wronged.

ويقولون متى هذا الوعد إن كنتم صادقين
They say: "When will this promise come to pass,- if ye speak the truth?"

قل لا أملك لنفسي ضرا ولا نفعا إلا ما شاء الله لكل أمة أجل إذا جاء أجلهم فلا يستأخرون ساعة ولا يستقدمون
Say: "I have no power over any harm or profit to myself except as Allah willeth. To every people is a term appointed: when their term is reached, not an hour can they cause delay, nor (an hour) can they advance (it in anticipation)."

قل أرأيتم إن أتاكم عذابه بياتا أو نهارا ماذا يستعجل منه المجرمون
Say: "Do ye see,- if His punishment should come to you by night or by day,- what portion of it would the sinners wish to hasten?

أثم إذا ما وقع آمنتم به آلآن وقد كنتم به تستعجلون
"Would ye then believe in it at last, when it actually cometh to pass? (It will then be said): 'Ah! now? and ye wanted (aforetime) to hasten it on!'

ثم قيل للذين ظلموا ذوقوا عذاب الخلد هل تجزون إلا بما كنتم تكسبون
"At length will be said to the wrong-doers: 'Taste ye the enduring punishment! ye get but the recompense of what ye earned!'"

ويستنبئونك أحق هو قل إي وربي إنه لحق وما أنتم بمعجزين
They seek to be informed by thee: "Is that true?" Say: "Aye! by my Lord! it is the very truth! and ye cannot frustrate it!"

ولو أن لكل نفس ظلمت ما في الأرض لافتدت به وأسروا الندامة لما رأوا العذاب وقضي بينهم بالقسط وهم لا يظلمون
Every soul that hath sinned, if it possessed all that is on earth, would fain give it in ransom: They would declare (their) repentance when they see the penalty: but the judgment between them will be with justice, and no wrong will be done unto them.

ألا إن لله ما في السماوات والأرض ألا إن وعد الله حق ولكن أكثرهم لا يعلمون
Is it not (the case) that to Allah belongeth whatever is in the heavens and on earth? Is it not (the case) that Allah's promise is assuredly true? Yet most of them understand not.

هو يحيي ويميت وإليه ترجعون
It is He Who giveth life and who taketh it, and to Him shall ye all be brought back.

يا أيها الناس قد جاءتكم موعظة من ربكم وشفاء لما في الصدور وهدى ورحمة للمؤمنين
O mankind! there hath come to you a direction from your Lord and a healing for the (diseases) in your hearts,- and for those who believe, a guidance and a Mercy.

قل بفضل الله وبرحمته فبذلك فليفرحوا هو خير مما يجمعون
Say: "In the bounty of Allah. And in His Mercy,- in that let them rejoice": that is better than the (wealth) they hoard.

قل أرأيتم ما أنزل الله لكم من رزق فجعلتم منه حراما وحلالا قل آلله أذن لكم أم على الله تفترون
Say: "See ye what things Allah hath sent down to you for sustenance? Yet ye hold forbidden some things thereof and (some things) lawful." Say: "Hath Allah indeed permitted you, or do ye invent (things) to attribute to Allah?"

وما ظن الذين يفترون على الله الكذب يوم القيامة إن الله لذو فضل على الناس ولكن أكثرهم لا يشكرون
And what think those who invent lies against Allah, of the Day of Judgment? Verily Allah is full of bounty to mankind, but most of them are ungrateful.

وما تكون في شأن وما تتلو منه من قرآن ولا تعملون من عمل إلا كنا عليكم شهودا إذ تفيضون فيه وما يعزب عن ربك من مثقال ذرة في الأرض ولا في السماء ولا أصغر من ذلك ولا أكبر إلا في كتاب مبين
In whatever business thou mayest be, and whatever portion thou mayest be reciting from the Qur'an,- and whatever deed ye (mankind) may be doing,- We are witnesses thereof when ye are deeply engrossed therein. Nor is hidden from thy Lord (so much as) the weight of an atom on the earth or in heaven. And not the least and not the greatest of these things but are recorded in a clear record.

ألا إن أولياء الله لا خوف عليهم ولا هم يحزنون
Behold! verily on the friends of Allah there is no fear, nor shall they grieve;

الذين آمنوا وكانوا يتقون
Those who believe and (constantly) guard against evil;-

لهم البشرى في الحياة الدنيا وفي الآخرة لا تبديل لكلمات الله ذلك هو الفوز العظيم
For them are glad tidings, in the life of the present and in the Hereafter; no change can there be in the words of Allah. This is indeed the supreme felicity.

ولا يحزنك قولهم إن العزة لله جميعا هو السميع العليم
Let not their speech grieve thee: for all power and honour belong to Allah: It is He Who heareth and knoweth (all things).

ألا إن لله من في السماوات ومن في الأرض وما يتبع الذين يدعون من دون الله شركاء إن يتبعون إلا الظن وإن هم إلا يخرصون
Behold! verily to Allah belong all creatures, in the heavens and on earth. What do they follow who worship as His "partners" other than Allah? They follow nothing but fancy, and they do nothing but lie.

هو الذي جعل لكم الليل لتسكنوا فيه والنهار مبصرا إن في ذلك لآيات لقوم يسمعون
He it is That hath made you the night that ye may rest therein, and the day to make things visible (to you). Verily in this are signs for those who listen (to His Message).

قالوا اتخذ الله ولدا سبحانه هو الغني له ما في السماوات وما في الأرض إن عندكم من سلطان بهذا أتقولون على الله ما لا تعلمون
They say: "Allah hath begotten a son!" - Glory be to Him! He is self-sufficient! His are all things in the heavens and on earth! No warrant have ye for this! say ye about Allah what ye know not?

قل إن الذين يفترون على الله الكذب لا يفلحون
Say: "Those who invent a lie against Allah will never prosper."

متاع في الدنيا ثم إلينا مرجعهم ثم نذيقهم العذاب الشديد بما كانوا يكفرون
A little enjoyment in this world!- and then, to Us will be their return, then shall We make them taste the severest penalty for their blasphemies.

واتل عليهم نبأ نوح إذ قال لقومه يا قوم إن كان كبر عليكم مقامي وتذكيري بآيات الله فعلى الله توكلت فأجمعوا أمركم وشركاءكم ثم لا يكن أمركم عليكم غمة ثم اقضوا إلي ولا تنظرون
Relate to them the story of Noah. Behold! he said to his people: "O my people, if it be hard on your (mind) that I should stay (with you) and commemorate the signs of Allah,- yet I put my trust in Allah. Get ye then an agreement about your plan and among your partners, so your plan be on to you dark and dubious. Then pass your sentence on me, and give me no respite.

فإن توليتم فما سألتكم من أجر إن أجري إلا على الله وأمرت أن أكون من المسلمين
"But if ye turn back, (consider): no reward have I asked of you: my reward is only due from Allah, and I have been commanded to be of those who submit to Allah's will (in Islam)."

فكذبوه فنجيناه ومن معه في الفلك وجعلناهم خلائف وأغرقنا الذين كذبوا بآياتنا فانظر كيف كان عاقبة المنذرين
They rejected Him, but We delivered him, and those with him, in the Ark, and We made them inherit (the earth), while We overwhelmed in the flood those who rejected Our Signs. Then see what was the end of those who were warned (but heeded not)!

ثم بعثنا من بعده رسلا إلى قومهم فجاءوهم بالبينات فما كانوا ليؤمنوا بما كذبوا به من قبل كذلك نطبع على قلوب المعتدين
Then after him We sent (many) messengers to their peoples: they brought them Clear Signs, but they would not believe what they had already rejected beforehand. Thus do We seal the hearts of the transgressors.

ثم بعثنا من بعدهم موسى وهارون إلى فرعون وملئه بآياتنا فاستكبروا وكانوا قوما مجرمين
Then after them sent We Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh and his chiefs with Our Signs. But they were arrogant: they were a people in sin.

فلما جاءهم الحق من عندنا قالوا إن هذا لسحر مبين
When the Truth did come to them from Us, they said: "This is indeed evident sorcery!"

قال موسى أتقولون للحق لما جاءكم أسحر هذا ولا يفلح الساحرون
Said Moses: "Say ye (this) about the truth when it hath (actually) reached you? Is sorcery (like) this? But sorcerers will not prosper."

قالوا أجئتنا لتلفتنا عما وجدنا عليه آباءنا وتكون لكما الكبرياء في الأرض وما نحن لكما بمؤمنين
They said: "Hast thou come to us to turn us away from the ways we found our fathers following,- in order that thou and thy brother may have greatness in the land? But not we shall believe in you!"

وقال فرعون ائتوني بكل ساحر عليم
Said Pharaoh: "Bring me every sorcerer well versed."

فلما جاء السحرة قال لهم موسى ألقوا ما أنتم ملقون
When the sorcerers came, Moses said to them: "Throw ye what ye (wish) to throw!"

فلما ألقوا قال موسى ما جئتم به السحر إن الله سيبطله إن الله لا يصلح عمل المفسدين
When they had had their throw, Moses said: "What ye have brought is sorcery: Allah will surely make it of no effect: for Allah prospereth not the work of those who make mischief.

ويحق الله الحق بكلماته ولو كره المجرمون
"And Allah by His words doth prove and establish His truth, however much the sinners may hate it!"

فما آمن لموسى إلا ذرية من قومه على خوف من فرعون وملئهم أن يفتنهم وإن فرعون لعال في الأرض وإنه لمن المسرفين
But none believed in Moses except some children of his people, because of the fear of Pharaoh and his chiefs, lest they should persecute them; and certainly Pharaoh was mighty on the earth and one who transgressed all bounds.

وقال موسى يا قوم إن كنتم آمنتم بالله فعليه توكلوا إن كنتم مسلمين
Moses said: "O my people! If ye do (really) believe in Allah, then in Him put your trust if ye submit (your will to His)."

فقالوا على الله توكلنا ربنا لا تجعلنا فتنة للقوم الظالمين
They said: "In Allah do we put out trust. Our Lord! make us not a trial for those who practise oppression;

ونجنا برحمتك من القوم الكافرين
"And deliver us by Thy Mercy from those who reject (Thee)."

وأوحينا إلى موسى وأخيه أن تبوآ لقومكما بمصر بيوتا واجعلوا بيوتكم قبلة وأقيموا الصلاة وبشر المؤمنين
We inspired Moses and his brother with this Message: "Provide dwellings for your people in Egypt, make your dwellings into places of worship, and establish regular prayers: and give glad tidings to those who believe!"

وقال موسى ربنا إنك آتيت فرعون وملأه زينة وأموالا في الحياة الدنيا ربنا ليضلوا عن سبيلك ربنا اطمس على أموالهم واشدد على قلوبهم فلا يؤمنوا حتى يروا العذاب الأليم
Moses prayed: "Our Lord! Thou hast indeed bestowed on Pharaoh and his chiefs splendour and wealth in the life of the present, and so, Our Lord, they mislead (men) from Thy Path. Deface, our Lord, the features of their wealth, and send hardness to their hearts, so they will not believe until they see the grievous penalty."

قال قد أجيبت دعوتكما فاستقيما ولا تتبعان سبيل الذين لا يعلمون
Allah said: "Accepted is your prayer (O Moses and Aaron)! So stand ye straight, and follow not the path of those who know not."

وجاوزنا ببني إسرائيل البحر فأتبعهم فرعون وجنوده بغيا وعدوا حتى إذا أدركه الغرق قال آمنت أنه لا إله إلا الذي آمنت به بنو إسرائيل وأنا من المسلمين
We took the Children of Israel across the sea: Pharaoh and his hosts followed them in insolence and spite. At length, when overwhelmed with the flood, he said: "I believe that there is no god except Him Whom the Children of Israel believe in: I am of those who submit (to Allah in Islam)."

آلآن وقد عصيت قبل وكنت من المفسدين
(It was said to him): "Ah now!- But a little while before, wast thou in rebellion!- and thou didst mischief (and violence)!

فاليوم ننجيك ببدنك لتكون لمن خلفك آية وإن كثيرا من الناس عن آياتنا لغافلون
"This day shall We save thee in the body, that thou mayest be a sign to those who come after thee! but verily, many among mankind are heedless of Our Signs!"

ولقد بوأنا بني إسرائيل مبوأ صدق ورزقناهم من الطيبات فما اختلفوا حتى جاءهم العلم إن ربك يقضي بينهم يوم القيامة فيما كانوا فيه يختلفون
We settled the Children of Israel in a beautiful dwelling-place, and provided for them sustenance of the best: it was after knowledge had been granted to them, that they fell into schisms. Verily Allah will judge between them as to the schisms amongst them, on the Day of Judgment.

فإن كنت في شك مما أنزلنا إليك فاسأل الذين يقرءون الكتاب من قبلك لقد جاءك الحق من ربك فلا تكونن من الممترين
If thou wert in doubt as to what We have revealed unto thee, then ask those who have been reading the Book from before thee: the Truth hath indeed come to thee from thy Lord: so be in no wise of those in doubt.

ولا تكونن من الذين كذبوا بآيات الله فتكون من الخاسرين
Nor be of those who reject the signs of Allah, or thou shalt be of those who perish.

إن الذين حقت عليهم كلمت ربك لا يؤمنون
Those against whom the word of thy Lord hath been verified would not believe-

ولو جاءتهم كل آية حتى يروا العذاب الأليم
Even if every Sign was brought unto them,- until they see (for themselves) the penalty grievous.

فلولا كانت قرية آمنت فنفعها إيمانها إلا قوم يونس لما آمنوا كشفنا عنهم عذاب الخزي في الحياة الدنيا ومتعناهم إلى حين
Why was there not a single township (among those We warned), which believed,- so its faith should have profited it,- except the people of Jonah? When they believed, We removed from them the penalty of ignominy in the life of the present, and permitted them to enjoy (their life) for a while.

ولو شاء ربك لآمن من في الأرض كلهم جميعا أفأنت تكره الناس حتى يكونوا مؤمنين
If it had been thy Lord's will, they would all have believed,- all who are on earth! wilt thou then compel mankind, against their will, to believe!

وما كان لنفس أن تؤمن إلا بإذن الله ويجعل الرجس على الذين لا يعقلون
No soul can believe, except by the will of Allah, and He will place doubt (or obscurity) on those who will not understand.

قل انظروا ماذا في السماوات والأرض وما تغني الآيات والنذر عن قوم لا يؤمنون
Say: "Behold all that is in the heavens and on earth"; but neither Signs nor Warners profit those who believe not.

فهل ينتظرون إلا مثل أيام الذين خلوا من قبلهم قل فانتظروا إني معكم من المنتظرين
Do they then expect (any thing) but (what happened in) the days of the men who passed away before them? Say: "Wait ye then: for I, too, will wait with you."

ثم ننجي رسلنا والذين آمنوا كذلك حقا علينا ننج المؤمنين
In the end We deliver Our messengers and those who believe: Thus is it fitting on Our part that We should deliver those who believe!

قل يا أيها الناس إن كنتم في شك من ديني فلا أعبد الذين تعبدون من دون الله ولكن أعبد الله الذي يتوفاكم وأمرت أن أكون من المؤمنين
Say: "O ye men! If ye are in doubt as to my religion, (behold!) I worship not what ye worship, other than Allah! But I worship Allah - Who will take your souls (at death): I am commanded to be (in the ranks) of the Believers,

وأن أقم وجهك للدين حنيفا ولا تكونن من المشركين
"And further (thus): 'set thy face towards religion with true piety, and never in any wise be of the Unbelievers;

ولا تدع من دون الله ما لا ينفعك ولا يضرك فإن فعلت فإنك إذا من الظالمين
"'Nor call on any, other than Allah;- Such will neither profit thee nor hurt thee: if thou dost, behold! thou shalt certainly be of those who do wrong.'"

وإن يمسسك الله بضر فلا كاشف له إلا هو وإن يردك بخير فلا راد لفضله يصيب به من يشاء من عباده وهو الغفور الرحيم
If Allah do touch thee with hurt, there is none can remove it but He: if He do design some benefit for thee, there is none can keep back His favour: He causeth it to reach whomsoever of His servants He pleaseth. And He is the Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

قل يا أيها الناس قد جاءكم الحق من ربكم فمن اهتدى فإنما يهتدي لنفسه ومن ضل فإنما يضل عليها وما أنا عليكم بوكيل
Say: "O ye men! Now Truth hath reached you from your Lord! those who receive guidance, do so for the good of their own souls; those who stray, do so to their own loss: and I am not (set) over you to arrange your affairs."

واتبع ما يوحى إليك واصبر حتى يحكم الله وهو خير الحاكمين
Follow thou the inspiration sent unto thee, and be patient and constant, till Allah do decide: for He is the best to decide.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الر كتاب أحكمت آياته ثم فصلت من لدن حكيم خبير
A. L. R. (This is) a Book, with verses basic or fundamental (of established meaning), further explained in detail,- from One Who is Wise and Well-acquainted (with all things):

ألا تعبدوا إلا الله إنني لكم منه نذير وبشير
(It teacheth) that ye should worship none but Allah. (Say): "Verily I am (sent) unto you from Him to warn and to bring glad tidings:

وأن استغفروا ربكم ثم توبوا إليه يمتعكم متاعا حسنا إلى أجل مسمى ويؤت كل ذي فضل فضله وإن تولوا فإني أخاف عليكم عذاب يوم كبير
"(And to preach thus), 'Seek ye the forgiveness of your Lord, and turn to Him in repentance; that He may grant you enjoyment, good (and true), for a term appointed, and bestow His abounding grace on all who abound in merit! But if ye turn away, then I fear for you the penalty of a great day:

إلى الله مرجعكم وهو على كل شيء قدير
'To Allah is your return, and He hath power over all things.'"

ألا إنهم يثنون صدورهم ليستخفوا منه ألا حين يستغشون ثيابهم يعلم ما يسرون وما يعلنون إنه عليم بذات الصدور
Behold! they fold up their hearts, that they may lie hid from Him! Ah even when they cover themselves with their garments, He knoweth what they conceal, and what they reveal: for He knoweth well the (inmost secrets) of the hearts.

وما من دابة في الأرض إلا على الله رزقها ويعلم مستقرها ومستودعها كل في كتاب مبين
There is no moving creature on earth but its sustenance dependeth on Allah: He knoweth the time and place of its definite abode and its temporary deposit: All is in a clear Record.

وهو الذي خلق السماوات والأرض في ستة أيام وكان عرشه على الماء ليبلوكم أيكم أحسن عملا ولئن قلت إنكم مبعوثون من بعد الموت ليقولن الذين كفروا إن هذا إلا سحر مبين
He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days - and His Throne was over the waters - that He might try you, which of you is best in conduct. But if thou wert to say to them, "Ye shall indeed be raised up after death", the Unbelievers would be sure to say, "This is nothing but obvious sorcery!"

ولئن أخرنا عنهم العذاب إلى أمة معدودة ليقولن ما يحبسه ألا يوم يأتيهم ليس مصروفا عنهم وحاق بهم ما كانوا به يستهزئون
If We delay the penalty for them for a definite term, they are sure to say, "What keeps it back?" Ah! On the day it (actually) reaches them, nothing will turn it away from them, and they will be completely encircled by that which they used to mock at!

ولئن أذقنا الإنسان منا رحمة ثم نزعناها منه إنه ليئوس كفور
If We give man a taste of Mercy from Ourselves, and then withdraw it from him, behold! he is in despair and (falls into) blasphemy.

ولئن أذقناه نعماء بعد ضراء مسته ليقولن ذهب السيئات عني إنه لفرح فخور
But if We give him a taste of (Our) favours after adversity hath touched him, he is sure to say, "All evil has departed from me:" Behold! he falls into exultation and pride.

إلا الذين صبروا وعملوا الصالحات أولئك لهم مغفرة وأجر كبير
Not so do those who show patience and constancy, and work righteousness; for them is forgiveness (of sins) and a great reward.

فلعلك تارك بعض ما يوحى إليك وضائق به صدرك أن يقولوا لولا أنزل عليه كنز أو جاء معه ملك إنما أنت نذير والله على كل شيء وكيل
Perchance thou mayest (feel the inclination) to give up a part of what is revealed unto thee, and thy heart feeleth straitened lest they say, "Why is not a treasure sent down unto him, or why does not an angel come down with him?" But thou art there only to warn! It is Allah that arrangeth all affairs!

أم يقولون افتراه قل فأتوا بعشر سور مثله مفتريات وادعوا من استطعتم من دون الله إن كنتم صادقين
Or they may say, "He forged it," Say, "Bring ye then ten suras forged, like unto it, and call (to your aid) whomsoever ye can, other than Allah!- If ye speak the truth!

فإلم يستجيبوا لكم فاعلموا أنما أنزل بعلم الله وأن لا إله إلا هو فهل أنتم مسلمون
"If then they (your false gods) answer not your (call), know ye that this revelation is sent down (replete) with the knowledge of Allah, and that there is no god but He! will ye even then submit (to Islam)?"

من كان يريد الحياة الدنيا وزينتها نوف إليهم أعمالهم فيها وهم فيها لا يبخسون
Those who desire the life of the present and its glitter,- to them we shall pay (the price of) their deeds therein,- without diminution.

أولئك الذين ليس لهم في الآخرة إلا النار وحبط ما صنعوا فيها وباطل ما كانوا يعملون
They are those for whom there is nothing in the Hereafter but the Fire: vain are the designs they frame therein, and of no effect and the deeds that they do!

أفمن كان على بينة من ربه ويتلوه شاهد منه ومن قبله كتاب موسى إماما ورحمة أولئك يؤمنون به ومن يكفر به من الأحزاب فالنار موعده فلا تك في مرية منه إنه الحق من ربك ولكن أكثر الناس لا يؤمنون
Can they be (like) those who accept a Clear (Sign) from their Lord, and whom a witness from Himself doth teach, as did the Book of Moses before it,- a guide and a mercy? They believe therein; but those of the Sects that reject it,- the Fire will be their promised meeting-place. Be not then in doubt thereon: for it is the truth from thy Lord: yet many among men do not believe!

ومن أظلم ممن افترى على الله كذبا أولئك يعرضون على ربهم ويقول الأشهاد هؤلاء الذين كذبوا على ربهم ألا لعنة الله على الظالمين
Who doth more wrong than those who invent a life against Allah? They will be turned back to the presence of their Lord, and the witnesses will say, "These are the ones who lied against their Lord! Behold! the Curse of Allah is on those who do wrong!-

الذين يصدون عن سبيل الله ويبغونها عوجا وهم بالآخرة هم كافرون
"Those who would hinder (men) from the path of Allah and would seek in it something crooked: these were they who denied the Hereafter!"

أولئك لم يكونوا معجزين في الأرض وما كان لهم من دون الله من أولياء يضاعف لهم العذاب ما كانوا يستطيعون السمع وما كانوا يبصرون
They will in no wise frustrate (His design) on earth, nor have they protectors besides Allah! Their penalty will be doubled! They lost the power to hear, and they did not see!

أولئك الذين خسروا أنفسهم وضل عنهم ما كانوا يفترون
They are the ones who have lost their own souls: and the (fancies) they invented have left them in the lurch!

لا جرم أنهم في الآخرة هم الأخسرون
Without a doubt, these are the very ones who will lose most in the Hereafter!

إن الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات وأخبتوا إلى ربهم أولئك أصحاب الجنة هم فيها خالدون
But those who believe and work righteousness, and humble themselves before their Lord,- They will be companions of the gardens, to dwell therein for aye!

مثل الفريقين كالأعمى والأصم والبصير والسميع هل يستويان مثلا أفلا تذكرون
These two kinds (of men) may be compared to the blind and deaf, and those who can see and hear well. Are they equal when compared? Will ye not then take heed?

ولقد أرسلنا نوحا إلى قومه إني لكم نذير مبين
We sent Noah to his people (with a mission): "I have come to you with a Clear Warning:

أن لا تعبدوا إلا الله إني أخاف عليكم عذاب يوم أليم
"That ye serve none but Allah: Verily I do fear for you the penalty of a grievous day."

فقال الملأ الذين كفروا من قومه ما نراك إلا بشرا مثلنا وما نراك اتبعك إلا الذين هم أراذلنا بادي الرأي وما نرى لكم علينا من فضل بل نظنكم كاذبين
But the chiefs of the Unbelievers among his people said: "We see (in) thee nothing but a man like ourselves: Nor do we see that any follow thee but the meanest among us, in judgment immature: Nor do we see in you (all) any merit above us: in fact we think ye are liars!"

قال يا قوم أرأيتم إن كنت على بينة من ربي وآتاني رحمة من عنده فعميت عليكم أنلزمكموها وأنتم لها كارهون
He said: "O my people! See ye if (it be that) I have a Clear Sign from my Lord, and that He hath sent Mercy unto me from His own presence, but that the Mercy hath been obscured from your sight? shall we compel you to accept it when ye are averse to it?

ويا قوم لا أسألكم عليه مالا إن أجري إلا على الله وما أنا بطارد الذين آمنوا إنهم ملاقو ربهم ولكني أراكم قوما تجهلون
"And O my people! I ask you for no wealth in return: my reward is from none but Allah: But I will not drive away (in contempt) those who believe: for verily they are to meet their Lord, and ye I see are the ignorant ones!

ويا قوم من ينصرني من الله إن طردتهم أفلا تذكرون
"And O my people! who would help me against Allah if I drove them away? Will ye not then take heed?

ولا أقول لكم عندي خزائن الله ولا أعلم الغيب ولا أقول إني ملك ولا أقول للذين تزدري أعينكم لن يؤتيهم الله خيرا الله أعلم بما في أنفسهم إني إذا لمن الظالمين
"I tell you not that with me are the treasures of Allah, nor do I know what is hidden, nor claim I to be an angel. Nor yet do I say, of those whom your eyes do despise that Allah will not grant them (all) that is good: Allah knoweth best what is in their souls: I should, if I did, indeed be a wrong-doer."

قالوا يا نوح قد جادلتنا فأكثرت جدالنا فأتنا بما تعدنا إن كنت من الصادقين
They said: "O Noah! thou hast disputed with us, and (much) hast thou prolonged the dispute with us: now bring upon us what thou threatenest us with, if thou speakest the truth!?"

قال إنما يأتيكم به الله إن شاء وما أنتم بمعجزين
He said: "Truly, Allah will bring it on you if He wills,- and then, ye will not be able to frustrate it!

ولا ينفعكم نصحي إن أردت أن أنصح لكم إن كان الله يريد أن يغويكم هو ربكم وإليه ترجعون
"Of no profit will be my counsel to you, much as I desire to give you (good) counsel, if it be that Allah willeth to leave you astray: He is your Lord! and to Him will ye return!"

أم يقولون افتراه قل إن افتريته فعلي إجرامي وأنا بريء مما تجرمون
Or do they say, "He has forged it"? Say: "If I had forged it, on me were my sin! and I am free of the sins of which ye are guilty!

وأوحي إلى نوح أنه لن يؤمن من قومك إلا من قد آمن فلا تبتئس بما كانوا يفعلون
It was revealed to Noah: "None of thy people will believe except those who have believed already! So grieve no longer over their (evil) deeds.

واصنع الفلك بأعيننا ووحينا ولا تخاطبني في الذين ظلموا إنهم مغرقون
"But construct an Ark under Our eyes and Our inspiration, and address Me no (further) on behalf of those who are in sin: for they are about to be overwhelmed (in the Flood)."

ويصنع الفلك وكلما مر عليه ملأ من قومه سخروا منه قال إن تسخروا منا فإنا نسخر منكم كما تسخرون
Forthwith he (starts) constructing the Ark: Every time that the chiefs of his people passed by him, they threw ridicule on him. He said: "If ye ridicule us now, we (in our turn) can look down on you with ridicule likewise!

فسوف تعلمون من يأتيه عذاب يخزيه ويحل عليه عذاب مقيم
"But soon will ye know who it is on whom will descend a penalty that will cover them with shame,- on whom will be unloosed a penalty lasting:"

حتى إذا جاء أمرنا وفار التنور قلنا احمل فيها من كل زوجين اثنين وأهلك إلا من سبق عليه القول ومن آمن وما آمن معه إلا قليل
At length, behold! there came Our command, and the fountains of the earth gushed forth! We said: "Embark therein, of each kind two, male and female, and your family - except those against whom the word has already gone forth,- and the Believers." but only a few believed with him.

وقال اركبوا فيها بسم الله مجراها ومرساها إن ربي لغفور رحيم
So he said: "Embark ye on the Ark, In the name of Allah, whether it move or be at rest! For my Lord is, be sure, Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful!"

وهي تجري بهم في موج كالجبال ونادى نوح ابنه وكان في معزل يا بني اركب معنا ولا تكن مع الكافرين
So the Ark floated with them on the waves (towering) like mountains, and Noah called out to his son, who had separated himself (from the rest): "O my son! embark with us, and be not with the unbelievers!"

قال سآوي إلى جبل يعصمني من الماء قال لا عاصم اليوم من أمر الله إلا من رحم وحال بينهما الموج فكان من المغرقين
The son replied: "I will betake myself to some mountain: it will save me from the water." Noah said: "This day nothing can save, from the command of Allah, any but those on whom He hath mercy! "And the waves came between them, and the son was among those overwhelmed in the Flood.

وقيل يا أرض ابلعي ماءك ويا سماء أقلعي وغيض الماء وقضي الأمر واستوت على الجودي وقيل بعدا للقوم الظالمين
Then the word went forth: "O earth! swallow up thy water, and O sky! Withhold (thy rain)!" and the water abated, and the matter was ended. The Ark rested on Mount Judi, and the word went forth: "Away with those who do wrong!"

ونادى نوح ربه فقال رب إن ابني من أهلي وإن وعدك الحق وأنت أحكم الحاكمين
And Noah called upon his Lord, and said: "O my Lord! surely my son is of my family! and Thy promise is true, and Thou art the justest of Judges!"

قال يا نوح إنه ليس من أهلك إنه عمل غير صالح فلا تسألن ما ليس لك به علم إني أعظك أن تكون من الجاهلين
He said: "O Noah! He is not of thy family: For his conduct is unrighteous. So ask not of Me that of which thou hast no knowledge! I give thee counsel, lest thou act like the ignorant!"

قال رب إني أعوذ بك أن أسألك ما ليس لي به علم وإلا تغفر لي وترحمني أكن من الخاسرين
Noah said: "O my Lord! I do seek refuge with Thee, lest I ask Thee for that of which I have no knowledge. And unless thou forgive me and have Mercy on me, I should indeed be lost!"

قيل يا نوح اهبط بسلام منا وبركات عليك وعلى أمم ممن معك وأمم سنمتعهم ثم يمسهم منا عذاب أليم
The word came: "O Noah! Come down (from the Ark) with peace from Us, and blessing on thee and on some of the peoples (who will spring) from those with thee: but (there will be other) peoples to whom We shall grant their pleasures (for a time), but in the end will a grievous penalty reach them from Us."

تلك من أنباء الغيب نوحيها إليك ما كنت تعلمها أنت ولا قومك من قبل هذا فاصبر إن العاقبة للمتقين
Such are some of the stories of the unseen, which We have revealed unto thee: before this, neither thou nor thy people knew them. So persevere patiently: for the End is for those who are righteous.

وإلى عاد أخاهم هودا قال يا قوم اعبدوا الله ما لكم من إله غيره إن أنتم إلا مفترون
To the 'Ad People (We sent) Hud, one of their own brethren. He said: "O my people! worship Allah! ye have no other god but Him. (Your other gods) ye do nothing but invent!

يا قوم لا أسألكم عليه أجرا إن أجري إلا على الذي فطرني أفلا تعقلون
"O my people! I ask of you no reward for this (Message). My reward is from none but Him who created me: Will ye not then understand?

ويا قوم استغفروا ربكم ثم توبوا إليه يرسل السماء عليكم مدرارا ويزدكم قوة إلى قوتكم ولا تتولوا مجرمين
"And O my people! Ask forgiveness of your Lord, and turn to Him (in repentance): He will send you the skies pouring abundant rain, and add strength to your strength: so turn ye not back in sin!"

قالوا يا هود ما جئتنا ببينة وما نحن بتاركي آلهتنا عن قولك وما نحن لك بمؤمنين
They said: "O Hud! No Clear (Sign) that hast thou brought us, and we are not the ones to desert our gods on thy word! Nor shall we believe in thee!

إن نقول إلا اعتراك بعض آلهتنا بسوء قال إني أشهد الله واشهدوا أني بريء مما تشركون
"We say nothing but that (perhaps) some of our gods may have seized thee with imbecility." He said: "I call Allah to witness, and do ye bear witness, that I am free from the sin of ascribing, to Him,

من دونه فكيدوني جميعا ثم لا تنظرون
"Other gods as partners! so scheme (your worst) against me, all of you, and give me no respite.

إني توكلت على الله ربي وربكم ما من دابة إلا هو آخذ بناصيتها إن ربي على صراط مستقيم
"I put my trust in Allah, My Lord and your Lord! There is not a moving creature, but He hath grasp of its fore-lock. Verily, it is my Lord that is on a straight Path.

فإن تولوا فقد أبلغتكم ما أرسلت به إليكم ويستخلف ربي قوما غيركم ولا تضرونه شيئا إن ربي على كل شيء حفيظ
"If ye turn away,- I (at least) have conveyed the Message with which I was sent to you. My Lord will make another people to succeed you, and you will not harm Him in the least. For my Lord hath care and watch over all things."

ولما جاء أمرنا نجينا هودا والذين آمنوا معه برحمة منا ونجيناهم من عذاب غليظ
So when Our decree issued, We saved Hud and those who believed with him, by (special) Grace from Ourselves: We saved them from a severe penalty.

وتلك عاد جحدوا بآيات ربهم وعصوا رسله واتبعوا أمر كل جبار عنيد
Such were the 'Ad People: they rejected the Signs of their Lord and Cherisher; disobeyed His messengers; And followed the command of every powerful, obstinate transgressor.

وأتبعوا في هذه الدنيا لعنة ويوم القيامة ألا إن عادا كفروا ربهم ألا بعدا لعاد قوم هود
And they were pursued by a Curse in this life,- and on the Day of Judgment. Ah! Behold! for the 'Ad rejected their Lord and Cherisher! Ah! Behold! removed (from sight) were 'Ad the people of Hud!

وإلى ثمود أخاهم صالحا قال يا قوم اعبدوا الله ما لكم من إله غيره هو أنشأكم من الأرض واستعمركم فيها فاستغفروه ثم توبوا إليه إن ربي قريب مجيب
To the Thamud People (We sent) Salih, one of their own brethren. He said: "O my people! Worship Allah: ye have no other god but Him. It is He Who hath produced you from the earth and settled you therein: then ask forgiveness of Him, and turn to Him (in repentance): for my Lord is (always) near, ready to answer."

قالوا يا صالح قد كنت فينا مرجوا قبل هذا أتنهانا أن نعبد ما يعبد آباؤنا وإننا لفي شك مما تدعونا إليه مريب
They said: "O Salih! thou hast been of us! a centre of our hopes hitherto! dost thou (now) forbid us the worship of what our fathers worshipped? But we are really in suspicious (disquieting) doubt as to that to which thou invitest us."

قال يا قوم أرأيتم إن كنت على بينة من ربي وآتاني منه رحمة فمن ينصرني من الله إن عصيته فما تزيدونني غير تخسير
He said: "O my people! do ye see? if I have a Clear (Sign) from my Lord and He hath sent Mercy unto me from Himself,- who then can help me against Allah if I were to disobey Him? What then would ye add to my (portion) but perdition?

ويا قوم هذه ناقة الله لكم آية فذروها تأكل في أرض الله ولا تمسوها بسوء فيأخذكم عذاب قريب
"And O my people! This she-camel of Allah is a symbol to you: leave her to feed on Allah's (free) earth, and inflict no harm on her, or a swift penalty will seize you!"

فعقروها فقال تمتعوا في داركم ثلاثة أيام ذلك وعد غير مكذوب
But they did ham-string her. So he said: "Enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days: (Then will be your ruin): (Behold) there a promise not to be belied!"

فلما جاء أمرنا نجينا صالحا والذين آمنوا معه برحمة منا ومن خزي يومئذ إن ربك هو القوي العزيز
When Our Decree issued, We saved Salih and those who believed with him, by (special) Grace from Ourselves - and from the Ignominy of that day. For thy Lord - He is the Strong One, and able to enforce His Will.

وأخذ الذين ظلموا الصيحة فأصبحوا في ديارهم جاثمين
The (mighty) Blast overtook the wrong-doers, and they lay prostrate in their homes before the morning,-

كأن لم يغنوا فيها ألا إن ثمود كفروا ربهم ألا بعدا لثمود
As if they had never dwelt and flourished there. Ah! Behold! for the Thamud rejected their Lord and Cherisher! Ah! Behold! removed (from sight) were the Thamud!

ولقد جاءت رسلنا إبراهيم بالبشرى قالوا سلاما قال سلام فما لبث أن جاء بعجل حنيذ
There came Our messengers to Abraham with glad tidings. They said, "Peace!" He answered, "Peace!" and hastened to entertain them with a roasted calf.

فلما رأى أيديهم لا تصل إليه نكرهم وأوجس منهم خيفة قالوا لا تخف إنا أرسلنا إلى قوم لوط
But when he saw their hands went not towards the (meal), he felt some mistrust of them, and conceived a fear of them. They said: "Fear not: We have been sent against the people of Lut."

وامرأته قائمة فضحكت فبشرناها بإسحاق ومن وراء إسحاق يعقوب
And his wife was standing (there), and she laughed: But we gave her glad tidings of Isaac, and after him, of Jacob.

قالت يا ويلتى أألد وأنا عجوز وهذا بعلي شيخا إن هذا لشيء عجيب
She said: "Alas for me! shall I bear a child, seeing I am an old woman, and my husband here is an old man? That would indeed be a wonderful thing!"

قالوا أتعجبين من أمر الله رحمت الله وبركاته عليكم أهل البيت إنه حميد مجيد
They said: "Dost thou wonder at Allah's decree? The grace of Allah and His blessings on you, o ye people of the house! for He is indeed worthy of all praise, full of all glory!"

فلما ذهب عن إبراهيم الروع وجاءته البشرى يجادلنا في قوم لوط
When fear had passed from (the mind of) Abraham and the glad tidings had reached him, he began to plead with us for Lut's people.

إن إبراهيم لحليم أواه منيب
For Abraham was, without doubt, forbearing (of faults), compassionate, and given to look to Allah.

يا إبراهيم أعرض عن هذا إنه قد جاء أمر ربك وإنهم آتيهم عذاب غير مردود
O Abraham! Seek not this. The decree of thy Lord hath gone forth: for them there cometh a penalty that cannot be turned back!

ولما جاءت رسلنا لوطا سيء بهم وضاق بهم ذرعا وقال هذا يوم عصيب
When Our messengers came to Lut, he was grieved on their account and felt himself powerless (to protect) them. He said: "This is a distressful day."

وجاءه قومه يهرعون إليه ومن قبل كانوا يعملون السيئات قال يا قوم هؤلاء بناتي هن أطهر لكم فاتقوا الله ولا تخزون في ضيفي أليس منكم رجل رشيد
And his people came rushing towards him, and they had been long in the habit of practising abominations. He said: "O my people! Here are my daughters: they are purer for you (if ye marry)! Now fear Allah, and cover me not with shame about my guests! Is there not among you a single right-minded man?"

قالوا لقد علمت ما لنا في بناتك من حق وإنك لتعلم ما نريد
They said: "Well dost thou know we have no need of thy daughters: indeed thou knowest quite well what we want!"

قال لو أن لي بكم قوة أو آوي إلى ركن شديد
He said: "Would that I had power to suppress you or that I could betake myself to some powerful support."

قالوا يا لوط إنا رسل ربك لن يصلوا إليك فأسر بأهلك بقطع من الليل ولا يلتفت منكم أحد إلا امرأتك إنه مصيبها ما أصابهم إن موعدهم الصبح أليس الصبح بقريب
(The Messengers) said: "O Lut! We are Messengers from thy Lord! By no means shall they reach thee! now travel with thy family while yet a part of the night remains, and let not any of you look back: but thy wife (will remain behind): To her will happen what happens to the people. Morning is their time appointed: Is not the morning nigh?"

فلما جاء أمرنا جعلنا عاليها سافلها وأمطرنا عليها حجارة من سجيل منضود
When Our Decree issued, We turned (the cities) upside down, and rained down on them brimstones hard as baked clay, spread, layer on layer,-

مسومة عند ربك وما هي من الظالمين ببعيد
Marked as from thy Lord: Nor are they ever far from those who do wrong!

وإلى مدين أخاهم شعيبا قال يا قوم اعبدوا الله ما لكم من إله غيره ولا تنقصوا المكيال والميزان إني أراكم بخير وإني أخاف عليكم عذاب يوم محيط
To the Madyan People (We sent) Shu'aib, one of their own brethren: he said: "O my people! worship Allah: Ye have no other god but Him. And give not short measure or weight: I see you in prosperity, but I fear for you the penalty of a day that will compass (you) all round.

ويا قوم أوفوا المكيال والميزان بالقسط ولا تبخسوا الناس أشياءهم ولا تعثوا في الأرض مفسدين
"And O my people! give just measure and weight, nor withhold from the people the things that are their due: commit not evil in the land with intent to do mischief.

بقيت الله خير لكم إن كنتم مؤمنين وما أنا عليكم بحفيظ
"That which is left you by Allah is best for you, if ye (but) believed! but I am not set over you to keep watch!"

قالوا يا شعيب أصلاتك تأمرك أن نترك ما يعبد آباؤنا أو أن نفعل في أموالنا ما نشاء إنك لأنت الحليم الرشيد
They said: "O Shu'aib! Does thy (religion of) prayer command thee that we leave off the worship which our fathers practised, or that we leave off doing what we like with our property? truly, thou art the one that forbeareth with faults and is right-minded!"

قال يا قوم أرأيتم إن كنت على بينة من ربي ورزقني منه رزقا حسنا وما أريد أن أخالفكم إلى ما أنهاكم عنه إن أريد إلا الإصلاح ما استطعت وما توفيقي إلا بالله عليه توكلت وإليه أنيب
He said: "O my people! see ye whether I have a Clear (Sign) from my Lord, and He hath given me sustenance (pure and) good as from Himself? I wish not, in opposition to you, to do that which I forbid you to do. I only desire (your) betterment to the best of my power; and my success (in my task) can only come from Allah. In Him I trust, and unto Him I look.

ويا قوم لا يجرمنكم شقاقي أن يصيبكم مثل ما أصاب قوم نوح أو قوم هود أو قوم صالح وما قوم لوط منكم ببعيد
"And O my people! let not my dissent (from you) cause you to sin, lest ye suffer a fate similar to that of the people of Noah or of Hud or of Salih, nor are the people of Lut far off from you!

واستغفروا ربكم ثم توبوا إليه إن ربي رحيم ودود
"But ask forgiveness of your Lord, and turn unto Him (in repentance): For my Lord is indeed full of mercy and loving-kindness."

قالوا يا شعيب ما نفقه كثيرا مما تقول وإنا لنراك فينا ضعيفا ولولا رهطك لرجمناك وما أنت علينا بعزيز
They said: "O Shu'aib! much of what thou sayest we do not understand! In fact among us we see that thou hast no strength! Were it not for thy family, we should certainly have stoned thee! for thou hast among us no great position!"

قال يا قوم أرهطي أعز عليكم من الله واتخذتموه وراءكم ظهريا إن ربي بما تعملون محيط
He said: "O my people! is then my family of more consideration with you than Allah? For ye cast Him away behind your backs (with contempt). But verily my Lord encompasseth on all sides all that ye do!

ويا قوم اعملوا على مكانتكم إني عامل سوف تعلمون من يأتيه عذاب يخزيه ومن هو كاذب وارتقبوا إني معكم رقيب
"And O my people! Do whatever ye can: I will do (my part): Soon will ye know who it is on whom descends the penalty of ignominy; and who is a liar! and watch ye! for I too am watching with you!"

ولما جاء أمرنا نجينا شعيبا والذين آمنوا معه برحمة منا وأخذت الذين ظلموا الصيحة فأصبحوا في ديارهم جاثمين
When Our decree issued, We saved Shu'aib and those who believed with him, by (special) mercy from Ourselves: But the (mighty) blast did seize the wrong-doers, and they lay prostrate in their homes by the morning,-

كأن لم يغنوا فيها ألا بعدا لمدين كما بعدت ثمود
As if they had never dwelt and flourished there! Ah! Behold! How the Madyan were removed (from sight) as were removed the Thamud!

ولقد أرسلنا موسى بآياتنا وسلطان مبين
And we sent Moses, with Our Clear (Signs) and an authority manifest,

إلى فرعون وملئه فاتبعوا أمر فرعون وما أمر فرعون برشيد
Unto Pharaoh and his chiefs: but they followed the command of Pharaoh and the command of Pharaoh was no right (guide).

يقدم قومه يوم القيامة فأوردهم النار وبئس الورد المورود
He will go before his people on the Day of Judgment, and lead them into the Fire (as cattle are led to water): But woeful indeed will be the place to which they are led!

وأتبعوا في هذه لعنة ويوم القيامة بئس الرفد المرفود
And they are followed by a curse in this (life) and on the Day of Judgment: and woeful is the gift which shall be given (unto them)!

ذلك من أنباء القرى نقصه عليك منها قائم وحصيد
These are some of the stories of communities which We relate unto thee: of them some are standing, and some have been mown down (by the sickle of time).

وما ظلمناهم ولكن ظلموا أنفسهم فما أغنت عنهم آلهتهم التي يدعون من دون الله من شيء لما جاء أمر ربك وما زادوهم غير تتبيب
It was not We that wronged them: They wronged their own souls: the deities, other than Allah, whom they invoked, profited them no whit when there issued the decree of thy Lord: Nor did they add aught (to their lot) but perdition!

وكذلك أخذ ربك إذا أخذ القرى وهي ظالمة إن أخذه أليم شديد
Such is the chastisement of thy Lord when He chastises communities in the midst of their wrong: grievous, indeed, and severe is His chastisement.

إن في ذلك لآية لمن خاف عذاب الآخرة ذلك يوم مجموع له الناس وذلك يوم مشهود
In that is a Sign for those who fear the penalty of the Hereafter: that is a Day for which mankind will be gathered together: that will be a Day of Testimony.

وما نؤخره إلا لأجل معدود
Nor shall We delay it but for a term appointed.

يوم يأت لا تكلم نفس إلا بإذنه فمنهم شقي وسعيد
The day it arrives, no soul shall speak except by His leave: of those (gathered) some will be wretched and some will be blessed.

فأما الذين شقوا ففي النار لهم فيها زفير وشهيق
Those who are wretched shall be in the Fire: There will be for them therein (nothing but) the heaving of sighs and sobs:

خالدين فيها ما دامت السماوات والأرض إلا ما شاء ربك إن ربك فعال لما يريد
They will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure, except as thy Lord willeth: for thy Lord is the (sure) accomplisher of what He planneth.

وأما الذين سعدوا ففي الجنة خالدين فيها ما دامت السماوات والأرض إلا ما شاء ربك عطاء غير مجذوذ
And those who are blessed shall be in the Garden: They will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure, except as thy Lord willeth: a gift without break.

فلا تك في مرية مما يعبد هؤلاء ما يعبدون إلا كما يعبد آباؤهم من قبل وإنا لموفوهم نصيبهم غير منقوص
Be not then in doubt as to what these men worship. They worship nothing but what their fathers worshipped before (them): but verily We shall pay them back (in full) their portion without (the least) abatement.

ولقد آتينا موسى الكتاب فاختلف فيه ولولا كلمة سبقت من ربك لقضي بينهم وإنهم لفي شك منه مريب
We certainly gave the Book to Moses, but differences arose therein: had it not been that a word had gone forth before from thy Lord, the matter would have been decided between them, but they are in suspicious doubt concerning it.

وإن كلا لما ليوفينهم ربك أعمالهم إنه بما يعملون خبير
And, of a surety, to all will your Lord pay back (in full the recompense) of their deeds: for He knoweth well all that they do.

فاستقم كما أمرت ومن تاب معك ولا تطغوا إنه بما تعملون بصير
Therefore stand firm (in the straight Path) as thou art commanded,- thou and those who with thee turn (unto Allah); and transgress not (from the Path): for He seeth well all that ye do.

ولا تركنوا إلى الذين ظلموا فتمسكم النار وما لكم من دون الله من أولياء ثم لا تنصرون
And incline not to those who do wrong, or the Fire will seize you; and ye have no protectors other than Allah, nor shall ye be helped.

وأقم الصلاة طرفي النهار وزلفا من الليل إن الحسنات يذهبن السيئات ذلك ذكرى للذاكرين
And establish regular prayers at the two ends of the day and at the approaches of the night: For those things, that are good remove those that are evil: Be that the word of remembrance to those who remember (their Lord):

واصبر فإن الله لا يضيع أجر المحسنين
And be steadfast in patience; for verily Allah will not suffer the reward of the righteous to perish.

فلولا كان من القرون من قبلكم أولو بقية ينهون عن الفساد في الأرض إلا قليلا ممن أنجينا منهم واتبع الذين ظلموا ما أترفوا فيه وكانوا مجرمين
Why were there not, among the generations before you, persons possessed of balanced good sense, prohibiting (men) from mischief in the earth - except a few among them whom We saved (from harm)? But the wrong-doers pursued the enjoyment of the good things of life which were given them, and persisted in sin.

وما كان ربك ليهلك القرى بظلم وأهلها مصلحون
Nor would thy Lord be the One to destroy communities for a single wrong-doing, if its members were likely to mend.

ولو شاء ربك لجعل الناس أمة واحدة ولا يزالون مختلفين
If thy Lord had so willed, He could have made mankind one people: but they will not cease to dispute.

إلا من رحم ربك ولذلك خلقهم وتمت كلمة ربك لأملأن جهنم من الجنة والناس أجمعين
Except those on whom thy Lord hath bestowed His Mercy: and for this did He create them: and the Word of thy Lord shall be fulfilled: "I will fill Hell with jinns and men all together."

وكلا نقص عليك من أنباء الرسل ما نثبت به فؤادك وجاءك في هذه الحق وموعظة وذكرى للمؤمنين
All that we relate to thee of the stories of the messengers,- with it We make firm thy heart: in them there cometh to thee the Truth, as well as an exhortation and a message of remembrance to those who believe.

وقل للذين لا يؤمنون اعملوا على مكانتكم إنا عاملون
Say to those who do not believe: "Do what ever ye can: We shall do our part;

وانتظروا إنا منتظرون
"And wait ye! We too shall wait."

ولله غيب السماوات والأرض وإليه يرجع الأمر كله فاعبده وتوكل عليه وما ربك بغافل عما تعملون
To Allah do belong the unseen (secrets) of the heavens and the earth, and to Him goeth back every affair (for decision): then worship Him, and put thy trust in Him: and thy Lord is not unmindful of aught that ye do.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الر تلك آيات الكتاب المبين
A. L. R. These are the symbols (or Verses) of the perspicuous Book.

إنا أنزلناه قرآنا عربيا لعلكم تعقلون
We have sent it down as an Arabic Qur'an, in order that ye may learn wisdom.

نحن نقص عليك أحسن القصص بما أوحينا إليك هذا القرآن وإن كنت من قبله لمن الغافلين
We do relate unto thee the most beautiful of stories, in that We reveal to thee this (portion of the) Qur'an: before this, thou too was among those who knew it not.

إذ قال يوسف لأبيه يا أبت إني رأيت أحد عشر كوكبا والشمس والقمر رأيتهم لي ساجدين
Behold! Joseph said to his father: "O my father! I did see eleven stars and the sun and the moon: I saw them prostrate themselves to me!"

قال يا بني لا تقصص رؤياك على إخوتك فيكيدوا لك كيدا إن الشيطان للإنسان عدو مبين
Said (the father): "My (dear) little son! relate not thy vision to thy brothers, lest they concoct a plot against thee: for Satan is to man an avowed enemy!

وكذلك يجتبيك ربك ويعلمك من تأويل الأحاديث ويتم نعمته عليك وعلى آل يعقوب كما أتمها على أبويك من قبل إبراهيم وإسحاق إن ربك عليم حكيم
"Thus will thy Lord choose thee and teach thee the interpretation of stories (and events) and perfect His favour to thee and to the posterity of Jacob - even as He perfected it to thy fathers Abraham and Isaac aforetime! for Allah is full of knowledge and wisdom."

لقد كان في يوسف وإخوته آيات للسائلين
Verily in Joseph and his brethren are signs (or symbols) for seekers (after Truth).

إذ قالوا ليوسف وأخوه أحب إلى أبينا منا ونحن عصبة إن أبانا لفي ضلال مبين
They said: "Truly Joseph and his brother are loved more by our father than we: But we are a goodly body! really our father is obviously wandering (in his mind)!

اقتلوا يوسف أو اطرحوه أرضا يخل لكم وجه أبيكم وتكونوا من بعده قوما صالحين
"Slay ye Joseph or cast him out to some (unknown) land, that so the favour of your father may be given to you alone: (there will be time enough) for you to be righteous after that!"

قال قائل منهم لا تقتلوا يوسف وألقوه في غيابت الجب يلتقطه بعض السيارة إن كنتم فاعلين
Said one of them: "Slay not Joseph, but if ye must do something, throw him down to the bottom of the well: he will be picked up by some caravan of travellers."

قالوا يا أبانا ما لك لا تأمنا على يوسف وإنا له لناصحون
They said: "O our father! why dost thou not trust us with Joseph,- seeing we are indeed his sincere well-wishers?

أرسله معنا غدا يرتع ويلعب وإنا له لحافظون
"Send him with us tomorrow to enjoy himself and play, and we shall take every care of him."

قال إني ليحزنني أن تذهبوا به وأخاف أن يأكله الذئب وأنتم عنه غافلون
(Jacob) said: "Really it saddens me that ye should take him away: I fear lest the wolf should devour him while ye attend not to him."

قالوا لئن أكله الذئب ونحن عصبة إنا إذا لخاسرون
They said: "If the wolf were to devour him while we are (so large) a party, then should we indeed (first) have perished ourselves!"

فلما ذهبوا به وأجمعوا أن يجعلوه في غيابت الجب وأوحينا إليه لتنبئنهم بأمرهم هذا وهم لا يشعرون
So they did take him away, and they all agreed to throw him down to the bottom of the well: and We put into his heart (this Message): 'Of a surety thou shalt (one day) tell them the truth of this their affair while they know (thee) not'

وجاءوا أباهم عشاء يبكون
Then they came to their father in the early part of the night, weeping.

قالوا يا أبانا إنا ذهبنا نستبق وتركنا يوسف عند متاعنا فأكله الذئب وما أنت بمؤمن لنا ولو كنا صادقين
They said: "O our father! We went racing with one another, and left Joseph with our things; and the wolf devoured him.... But thou wilt never believe us even though we tell the truth."

وجاءوا على قميصه بدم كذب قال بل سولت لكم أنفسكم أمرا فصبر جميل والله المستعان على ما تصفون
They stained his shirt with false blood. He said: "Nay, but your minds have made up a tale (that may pass) with you, (for me) patience is most fitting: Against that which ye assert, it is Allah (alone) Whose help can be sought"..

وجاءت سيارة فأرسلوا واردهم فأدلى دلوه قال يا بشرى هذا غلام وأسروه بضاعة والله عليم بما يعملون
Then there came a caravan of travellers: they sent their water-carrier (for water), and he let down his bucket (into the well)... He said: "Ah there! Good news! Here is a (fine) young man!" So they concealed him as a treasure! But Allah knoweth well all that they do!

وشروه بثمن بخس دراهم معدودة وكانوا فيه من الزاهدين
The (Brethren) sold him for a miserable price, for a few dirhams counted out: in such low estimation did they hold him!

وقال الذي اشتراه من مصر لامرأته أكرمي مثواه عسى أن ينفعنا أو نتخذه ولدا وكذلك مكنا ليوسف في الأرض ولنعلمه من تأويل الأحاديث والله غالب على أمره ولكن أكثر الناس لا يعلمون
The man in Egypt who bought him, said to his wife: "Make his stay (among us) honourable: may be he will bring us much good, or we shall adopt him as a son." Thus did We establish Joseph in the land, that We might teach him the interpretation of stories (and events). And Allah hath full power and control over His affairs; but most among mankind know it not.

ولما بلغ أشده آتيناه حكما وعلما وكذلك نجزي المحسنين
When Joseph attained His full manhood, We gave him power and knowledge: thus do We reward those who do right.

وراودته التي هو في بيتها عن نفسه وغلقت الأبواب وقالت هيت لك قال معاذ الله إنه ربي أحسن مثواي إنه لا يفلح الظالمون
But she in whose house he was, sought to seduce him from his (true) self: she fastened the doors, and said: "Now come, thou (dear one)!" He said: "Allah forbid! truly (thy husband) is my lord! he made my sojourn agreeable! truly to no good come those who do wrong!"

ولقد همت به وهم بها لولا أن رأى برهان ربه كذلك لنصرف عنه السوء والفحشاء إنه من عبادنا المخلصين
And (with passion) did she desire him, and he would have desired her, but that he saw the evidence of his Lord: thus (did We order) that We might turn away from him (all) evil and shameful deeds: for he was one of Our servants, sincere and purified.

واستبقا الباب وقدت قميصه من دبر وألفيا سيدها لدى الباب قالت ما جزاء من أراد بأهلك سوءا إلا أن يسجن أو عذاب أليم
So they both raced each other to the door, and she tore his shirt from the back: they both found her lord near the door. She said: "What is the (fitting) punishment for one who formed an evil design against thy wife, but prison or a grievous chastisement?"

قال هي راودتني عن نفسي وشهد شاهد من أهلها إن كان قميصه قد من قبل فصدقت وهو من الكاذبين
He said: "It was she that sought to seduce me - from my (true) self." And one of her household saw (this) and bore witness, (thus):- "If it be that his shirt is rent from the front, then is her tale true, and he is a liar!

وإن كان قميصه قد من دبر فكذبت وهو من الصادقين
"But if it be that his shirt is torn from the back, then is she the liar, and he is telling the truth!"

فلما رأى قميصه قد من دبر قال إنه من كيدكن إن كيدكن عظيم
So when he saw his shirt,- that it was torn at the back,- (her husband) said: "Behold! It is a snare of you women! truly, mighty is your snare!

يوسف أعرض عن هذا واستغفري لذنبك إنك كنت من الخاطئين
"O Joseph, pass this over! (O wife), ask forgiveness for thy sin, for truly thou hast been at fault!"

وقال نسوة في المدينة امرأت العزيز تراود فتاها عن نفسه قد شغفها حبا إنا لنراها في ضلال مبين
Ladies said in the City: "The wife of the (great) 'Aziz is seeking to seduce her slave from his (true) self: Truly hath he inspired her with violent love: we see she is evidently going astray."

فلما سمعت بمكرهن أرسلت إليهن وأعتدت لهن متكأ وآتت كل واحدة منهن سكينا وقالت اخرج عليهن فلما رأينه أكبرنه وقطعن أيديهن وقلن حاش لله ما هذا بشرا إن هذا إلا ملك كريم
When she heard of their malicious talk, she sent for them and prepared a banquet for them: she gave each of them a knife: and she said (to Joseph), "Come out before them." When they saw him, they did extol him, and (in their amazement) cut their hands: they said, "Allah preserve us! no mortal is this! this is none other than a noble angel!"

قالت فذلكن الذي لمتنني فيه ولقد راودته عن نفسه فاستعصم ولئن لم يفعل ما آمره ليسجنن وليكونا من الصاغرين
She said: "There before you is the man about whom ye did blame me! I did seek to seduce him from his (true) self but he did firmly save himself guiltless!.... and now, if he doth not my bidding, he shall certainly be cast into prison, and (what is more) be of the company of the vilest!"

قال رب السجن أحب إلي مما يدعونني إليه وإلا تصرف عني كيدهن أصب إليهن وأكن من الجاهلين
He said: "O my Lord! the prison is more to my liking than that to which they invite me: Unless Thou turn away their snare from me, I should (in my youthful folly) feel inclined towards them and join the ranks of the ignorant."

فاستجاب له ربه فصرف عنه كيدهن إنه هو السميع العليم
So his Lord hearkened to him (in his prayer), and turned away from him their snare: Verily He heareth and knoweth (all things).

ثم بدا لهم من بعد ما رأوا الآيات ليسجننه حتى حين
Then it occurred to the men, after they had seen the signs, (that it was best) to imprison him for a time.

ودخل معه السجن فتيان قال أحدهما إني أراني أعصر خمرا وقال الآخر إني أراني أحمل فوق رأسي خبزا تأكل الطير منه نبئنا بتأويله إنا نراك من المحسنين
Now with him there came into the prison two young men. Said one of them: "I see myself (in a dream) pressing wine." said the other: "I see myself (in a dream) carrying bread on my head, and birds are eating, thereof." "Tell us" (they said) "The truth and meaning thereof: for we see thou art one that doth good (to all)."

قال لا يأتيكما طعام ترزقانه إلا نبأتكما بتأويله قبل أن يأتيكما ذلكما مما علمني ربي إني تركت ملة قوم لا يؤمنون بالله وهم بالآخرة هم كافرون
He said: "Before any food comes (in due course) to feed either of you, I will surely reveal to you the truth and meaning of this ere it befall you: that is part of the (duty) which my Lord hath taught me. I have (I assure you) abandoned the ways of a people that believe not in Allah and that (even) deny the Hereafter.

واتبعت ملة آبائي إبراهيم وإسحاق ويعقوب ما كان لنا أن نشرك بالله من شيء ذلك من فضل الله علينا وعلى الناس ولكن أكثر الناس لا يشكرون
"And I follow the ways of my fathers,- Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and never could we attribute any partners whatever to Allah: that (comes) of the grace of Allah to us and to mankind: yet most men are not grateful.

يا صاحبي السجن أأرباب متفرقون خير أم الله الواحد القهار
"O my two companions of the prison! (I ask you): are many lords differing among themselves better, or the One Allah, Supreme and Irresistible?

ما تعبدون من دونه إلا أسماء سميتموها أنتم وآباؤكم ما أنزل الله بها من سلطان إن الحكم إلا لله أمر ألا تعبدوا إلا إياه ذلك الدين القيم ولكن أكثر الناس لا يعلمون
"If not Him, ye worship nothing but names which ye have named,- ye and your fathers,- for which Allah hath sent down no authority: the command is for none but Allah: He hath commanded that ye worship none but Him: that is the right religion, but most men understand not...

يا صاحبي السجن أما أحدكما فيسقي ربه خمرا وأما الآخر فيصلب فتأكل الطير من رأسه قضي الأمر الذي فيه تستفتيان
"O my two companions of the prison! As to one of you, he will pour out the wine for his lord to drink: as for the other, he will hang from the cross, and the birds will eat from off his head. (so) hath been decreed that matter whereof ye twain do enquire"...

وقال للذي ظن أنه ناج منهما اذكرني عند ربك فأنساه الشيطان ذكر ربه فلبث في السجن بضع سنين
And of the two, to that one whom he consider about to be saved, he said: "Mention me to thy lord." But Satan made him forget to mention him to his lord: and (Joseph) lingered in prison a few (more) years.

وقال الملك إني أرى سبع بقرات سمان يأكلهن سبع عجاف وسبع سنبلات خضر وأخر يابسات يا أيها الملأ أفتوني في رؤياي إن كنتم للرؤيا تعبرون
The king (of Egypt) said: "I do see (in a vision) seven fat kine, whom seven lean ones devour, and seven green ears of corn, and seven (others) withered. O ye chiefs! Expound to me my vision if it be that ye can interpret visions."

قالوا أضغاث أحلام وما نحن بتأويل الأحلام بعالمين
They said: "A confused medley of dreams: and we are not skilled in the interpretation of dreams."

وقال الذي نجا منهما وادكر بعد أمة أنا أنبئكم بتأويله فأرسلون
But the man who had been released, one of the two (who had been in prison) and who now bethought him after (so long) a space of time, said: "I will tell you the truth of its interpretation: send ye me (therefore)."

يوسف أيها الصديق أفتنا في سبع بقرات سمان يأكلهن سبع عجاف وسبع سنبلات خضر وأخر يابسات لعلي أرجع إلى الناس لعلهم يعلمون
"O Joseph!" (he said) "O man of truth! Expound to us (the dream) of seven fat kine whom seven lean ones devour, and of seven green ears of corn and (seven) others withered: that I may return to the people, and that they may understand."

قال تزرعون سبع سنين دأبا فما حصدتم فذروه في سنبله إلا قليلا مما تأكلون
(Joseph) said: "For seven years shall ye diligently sow as is your wont: and the harvests that ye reap, ye shall leave them in the ear,- except a little, of which ye shall eat.

ثم يأتي من بعد ذلك سبع شداد يأكلن ما قدمتم لهن إلا قليلا مما تحصنون
"Then will come after that (period) seven dreadful (years), which will devour what ye shall have laid by in advance for them,- (all) except a little which ye shall have (specially) guarded.

ثم يأتي من بعد ذلك عام فيه يغاث الناس وفيه يعصرون
"Then will come after that (period) a year in which the people will have abundant water, and in which they will press (wine and oil)."

وقال الملك ائتوني به فلما جاءه الرسول قال ارجع إلى ربك فاسأله ما بال النسوة اللاتي قطعن أيديهن إن ربي بكيدهن عليم
So the king said: "Bring ye him unto me." But when the messenger came to him, (Joseph) said: "Go thou back to thy lord, and ask him, 'What is the state of mind of the ladies who cut their hands'? For my Lord is certainly well aware of their snare."

قال ما خطبكن إذ راودتن يوسف عن نفسه قلن حاش لله ما علمنا عليه من سوء قالت امرأت العزيز الآن حصحص الحق أنا راودته عن نفسه وإنه لمن الصادقين
(The king) said (to the ladies): "What was your affair when ye did seek to seduce Joseph from his (true) self?" The ladies said: "Allah preserve us! no evil know we against him!" Said the 'Aziz's wife: "Now is the truth manifest (to all): it was I who sought to seduce him from his (true) self: He is indeed of those who are (ever) true (and virtuous).

ذلك ليعلم أني لم أخنه بالغيب وأن الله لا يهدي كيد الخائنين
"This (say I), in order that He may know that I have never been false to him in his absence, and that Allah will never guide the snare of the false ones.

وما أبرئ نفسي إن النفس لأمارة بالسوء إلا ما رحم ربي إن ربي غفور رحيم
"Nor do I absolve my own self (of blame): the (human) soul is certainly prone to evil, unless my Lord do bestow His Mercy: but surely my Lord is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful."

وقال الملك ائتوني به أستخلصه لنفسي فلما كلمه قال إنك اليوم لدينا مكين أمين
So the king said: "Bring him unto me; I will take him specially to serve about my own person." Therefore when he had spoken to him, he said: "Be assured this day, thou art, before our own presence, with rank firmly established, and fidelity fully proved!

قال اجعلني على خزائن الأرض إني حفيظ عليم
(Joseph) said: "Set me over the store-houses of the land: I will indeed guard them, as one that knows (their importance)."

وكذلك مكنا ليوسف في الأرض يتبوأ منها حيث يشاء نصيب برحمتنا من نشاء ولا نضيع أجر المحسنين
Thus did We give established power to Joseph in the land, to take possession therein as, when, or where he pleased. We bestow of our Mercy on whom We please, and We suffer not, to be lost, the reward of those who do good.

ولأجر الآخرة خير للذين آمنوا وكانوا يتقون
But verily the reward of the Hereafter is the best, for those who believe, and are constant in righteousness.

وجاء إخوة يوسف فدخلوا عليه فعرفهم وهم له منكرون
Then came Joseph's brethren: they entered his presence, and he knew them, but they knew him not.

ولما جهزهم بجهازهم قال ائتوني بأخ لكم من أبيكم ألا ترون أني أوفي الكيل وأنا خير المنزلين
And when he had furnished them forth with provisions (suitable) for them, he said: "Bring unto me a brother ye have, of the same father as yourselves, (but a different mother): see ye not that I pay out full measure, and that I do provide the best hospitality?

فإن لم تأتوني به فلا كيل لكم عندي ولا تقربون
"Now if ye bring him not to me, ye shall have no measure (of corn) from me, nor shall ye (even) come near me."

قالوا سنراود عنه أباه وإنا لفاعلون
They said: "We shall certainly seek to get our wish about him from his father: Indeed we shall do it."

وقال لفتيانه اجعلوا بضاعتهم في رحالهم لعلهم يعرفونها إذا انقلبوا إلى أهلهم لعلهم يرجعون
And (Joseph) told his servants to put their stock-in-trade (with which they had bartered) into their saddle-bags, so they should know it only when they returned to their people, in order that they might come back.

فلما رجعوا إلى أبيهم قالوا يا أبانا منع منا الكيل فأرسل معنا أخانا نكتل وإنا له لحافظون
Now when they returned to their father, they said: "O our father! No more measure of grain shall we get (unless we take our brother): So send our brother with us, that we may get our measure; and we will indeed take every care of him."

قال هل آمنكم عليه إلا كما أمنتكم على أخيه من قبل فالله خير حافظا وهو أرحم الراحمين
He said: "Shall I trust you with him with any result other than when I trusted you with his brother aforetime? But Allah is the best to take care (of him), and He is the Most Merciful of those who show mercy!"

ولما فتحوا متاعهم وجدوا بضاعتهم ردت إليهم قالوا يا أبانا ما نبغي هذه بضاعتنا ردت إلينا ونمير أهلنا ونحفظ أخانا ونزداد كيل بعير ذلك كيل يسير
Then when they opened their baggage, they found their stock-in-trade had been returned to them. They said: "O our father! What (more) can we desire? this our stock-in-trade has been returned to us: so we shall get (more) food for our family; We shall take care of our brother; and add (at the same time) a full camel's load (of grain to our provisions). This is but a small quantity.

قال لن أرسله معكم حتى تؤتون موثقا من الله لتأتنني به إلا أن يحاط بكم فلما آتوه موثقهم قال الله على ما نقول وكيل
(Jacob) said: "Never will I send him with you until ye swear a solemn oath to me, in Allah's name, that ye will be sure to bring him back to me unless ye are yourselves hemmed in (and made powerless). And when they had sworn their solemn oath, he said: "Over all that we say, be Allah the witness and guardian!"

وقال يا بني لا تدخلوا من باب واحد وادخلوا من أبواب متفرقة وما أغني عنكم من الله من شيء إن الحكم إلا لله عليه توكلت وعليه فليتوكل المتوكلون
Further he said: "O my sons! enter not all by one gate: enter ye by different gates. Not that I can profit you aught against Allah (with my advice): None can command except Allah: On Him do I put my trust: and let all that trust put their trust on Him."

ولما دخلوا من حيث أمرهم أبوهم ما كان يغني عنهم من الله من شيء إلا حاجة في نفس يعقوب قضاها وإنه لذو علم لما علمناه ولكن أكثر الناس لا يعلمون
And when they entered in the manner their father had enjoined, it did not profit them in the least against (the plan of) Allah: It was but a necessity of Jacob's soul, which he discharged. For he was, by our instruction, full of knowledge (and experience): but most men know not.

ولما دخلوا على يوسف آوى إليه أخاه قال إني أنا أخوك فلا تبتئس بما كانوا يعملون
Now when they came into Joseph's presence, he received his (full) brother to stay with him. He said (to him): "Behold! I am thy (own) brother; so grieve not at aught of their doings."

فلما جهزهم بجهازهم جعل السقاية في رحل أخيه ثم أذن مؤذن أيتها العير إنكم لسارقون
At length when he had furnished them forth with provisions (suitable) for them, he put the drinking cup into his brother's saddle-bag. Then shouted out a crier: "O ye (in) the caravan! behold! ye are thieves, without doubt!"

قالوا وأقبلوا عليهم ماذا تفقدون
They said, turning towards them: "What is it that ye miss?"

قالوا نفقد صواع الملك ولمن جاء به حمل بعير وأنا به زعيم
They said: "We miss the great beaker of the king; for him who produces it, is (the reward of) a camel load; I will be bound by it."

قالوا تالله لقد علمتم ما جئنا لنفسد في الأرض وما كنا سارقين
(The brothers) said: "By Allah! well ye know that we came not to make mischief in the land, and we are no thieves!"

قالوا فما جزاؤه إن كنتم كاذبين
(The Egyptians) said: "What then shall be the penalty of this, if ye are (proved) to have lied?"

قالوا جزاؤه من وجد في رحله فهو جزاؤه كذلك نجزي الظالمين
They said: "The penalty should be that he in whose saddle-bag it is found, should be held (as bondman) to atone for the (crime). Thus it is we punish the wrong-doers!"

فبدأ بأوعيتهم قبل وعاء أخيه ثم استخرجها من وعاء أخيه كذلك كدنا ليوسف ما كان ليأخذ أخاه في دين الملك إلا أن يشاء الله نرفع درجات من نشاء وفوق كل ذي علم عليم
So he began (the search) with their baggage, before (he came to) the baggage of his brother: at length he brought it out of his brother's baggage. Thus did We plan for Joseph. He could not take his brother by the law of the king except that Allah willed it (so). We raise to degrees (of wisdom) whom We please: but over all endued with knowledge is one, the All-Knowing.

قالوا إن يسرق فقد سرق أخ له من قبل فأسرها يوسف في نفسه ولم يبدها لهم قال أنتم شر مكانا والله أعلم بما تصفون
They said: "If he steals, there was a brother of his who did steal before (him)." But these things did Joseph keep locked in his heart, revealing not the secrets to them. He (simply) said (to himself): "Ye are the worse situated; and Allah knoweth best the truth of what ye assert!"

قالوا يا أيها العزيز إن له أبا شيخا كبيرا فخذ أحدنا مكانه إنا نراك من المحسنين
They said: "O exalted one! Behold! he has a father, aged and venerable, (who will grieve for him); so take one of us in his place; for we see that thou art (gracious) in doing good."

قال معاذ الله أن نأخذ إلا من وجدنا متاعنا عنده إنا إذا لظالمون
He said: "Allah forbid that we take other than him with whom we found our property: indeed (if we did so), we should be acting wrongfully.

فلما استيأسوا منه خلصوا نجيا قال كبيرهم ألم تعلموا أن أباكم قد أخذ عليكم موثقا من الله ومن قبل ما فرطتم في يوسف فلن أبرح الأرض حتى يأذن لي أبي أو يحكم الله لي وهو خير الحاكمين
Now when they saw no hope of his (yielding), they held a conference in private. The leader among them said: "Know ye not that your father did take an oath from you in Allah's name, and how, before this, ye did fail in your duty with Joseph? Therefore will I not leave this land until my father permits me, or Allah commands me; and He is the best to command.

ارجعوا إلى أبيكم فقولوا يا أبانا إن ابنك سرق وما شهدنا إلا بما علمنا وما كنا للغيب حافظين
"Turn ye back to your father, and say, 'O our father! behold! thy son committed theft! we bear witness only to what we know, and we could not well guard against the unseen!

واسأل القرية التي كنا فيها والعير التي أقبلنا فيها وإنا لصادقون
"'Ask at the town where we have been and the caravan in which we returned, and (you will find) we are indeed telling the truth.'"

قال بل سولت لكم أنفسكم أمرا فصبر جميل عسى الله أن يأتيني بهم جميعا إنه هو العليم الحكيم
Jacob said: "Nay, but ye have yourselves contrived a story (good enough) for you. So patience is most fitting (for me). Maybe Allah will bring them (back) all to me (in the end). For He is indeed full of knowledge and wisdom."

وتولى عنهم وقال يا أسفى على يوسف وابيضت عيناه من الحزن فهو كظيم
And he turned away from them, and said: "How great is my grief for Joseph!" And his eyes became white with sorrow, and he fell into silent melancholy.

قالوا تالله تفتأ تذكر يوسف حتى تكون حرضا أو تكون من الهالكين
They said: "By Allah! (never) wilt thou cease to remember Joseph until thou reach the last extremity of illness, or until thou die!"

قال إنما أشكو بثي وحزني إلى الله وأعلم من الله ما لا تعلمون
He said: "I only complain of my distraction and anguish to Allah, and I know from Allah that which ye know not...

يا بني اذهبوا فتحسسوا من يوسف وأخيه ولا تيأسوا من روح الله إنه لا ييأس من روح الله إلا القوم الكافرون
"O my sons! go ye and enquire about Joseph and his brother, and never give up hope of Allah's Soothing Mercy: truly no one despairs of Allah's Soothing Mercy, except those who have no faith."

فلما دخلوا عليه قالوا يا أيها العزيز مسنا وأهلنا الضر وجئنا ببضاعة مزجاة فأوف لنا الكيل وتصدق علينا إن الله يجزي المتصدقين
Then, when they came (back) into (Joseph's) presence they said: "O exalted one! distress has seized us and our family: we have (now) brought but scanty capital: so pay us full measure, (we pray thee), and treat it as charity to us: for Allah doth reward the charitable."

قال هل علمتم ما فعلتم بيوسف وأخيه إذ أنتم جاهلون
He said: "Know ye how ye dealt with Joseph and his brother, not knowing (what ye were doing)?"

قالوا أإنك لأنت يوسف قال أنا يوسف وهذا أخي قد من الله علينا إنه من يتق ويصبر فإن الله لا يضيع أجر المحسنين
They said: "Art thou indeed Joseph?" He said, "I am Joseph, and this is my brother: Allah has indeed been gracious to us (all): behold, he that is righteous and patient,- never will Allah suffer the reward to be lost, of those who do right."

قالوا تالله لقد آثرك الله علينا وإن كنا لخاطئين
They said: "By Allah! indeed has Allah preferred thee above us, and we certainly have been guilty of sin!"

قال لا تثريب عليكم اليوم يغفر الله لكم وهو أرحم الراحمين
He said: "This day let no reproach be (cast) on you: Allah will forgive you, and He is the Most Merciful of those who show mercy!

اذهبوا بقميصي هذا فألقوه على وجه أبي يأت بصيرا وأتوني بأهلكم أجمعين
"Go with this my shirt, and cast it over the face of my father: he will come to see (clearly). Then come ye (here) to me together with all your family."

ولما فصلت العير قال أبوهم إني لأجد ريح يوسف لولا أن تفندون
When the caravan left (Egypt), their father said: "I do indeed scent the presence of Joseph: Nay, think me not a dotard."

قالوا تالله إنك لفي ضلالك القديم
They said: "By Allah! truly thou art in thine old wandering mind."

فلما أن جاء البشير ألقاه على وجهه فارتد بصيرا قال ألم أقل لكم إني أعلم من الله ما لا تعلمون
Then when the bearer of the good news came, He cast (the shirt) over his face, and he forthwith regained clear sight. He said: "Did I not say to you, 'I know from Allah that which ye know not?'"

قالوا يا أبانا استغفر لنا ذنوبنا إنا كنا خاطئين
They said: "O our father! ask for us forgiveness for our sins, for we were truly at fault."

قال سوف أستغفر لكم ربي إنه هو الغفور الرحيم
He said: "Soon will I ask my Lord for forgiveness for you: for he is indeed Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

فلما دخلوا على يوسف آوى إليه أبويه وقال ادخلوا مصر إن شاء الله آمنين
Then when they entered the presence of Joseph, he provided a home for his parents with himself, and said: "Enter ye Egypt (all) in safety if it please Allah."

ورفع أبويه على العرش وخروا له سجدا وقال يا أبت هذا تأويل رؤياي من قبل قد جعلها ربي حقا وقد أحسن بي إذ أخرجني من السجن وجاء بكم من البدو من بعد أن نزغ الشيطان بيني وبين إخوتي إن ربي لطيف لما يشاء إنه هو العليم الحكيم
And he raised his parents high on the throne (of dignity), and they fell down in prostration, (all) before him. He said: "O my father! this is the fulfilment of my vision of old! Allah hath made it come true! He was indeed good to me when He took me out of prison and brought you (all here) out of the desert, (even) after Satan had sown enmity between me and my brothers. Verily my Lord understandeth best the mysteries of all that He planneth to do, for verily He is full of knowledge and wisdom.

رب قد آتيتني من الملك وعلمتني من تأويل الأحاديث فاطر السماوات والأرض أنت وليي في الدنيا والآخرة توفني مسلما وألحقني بالصالحين
"O my Lord! Thou hast indeed bestowed on me some power, and taught me something of the interpretation of dreams and events,- O Thou Creator of the heavens and the earth! Thou art my Protector in this world and in the Hereafter. Take Thou my soul (at death) as one submitting to Thy will (as a Muslim), and unite me with the righteous."

ذلك من أنباء الغيب نوحيه إليك وما كنت لديهم إذ أجمعوا أمرهم وهم يمكرون
Such is one of the stories of what happened unseen, which We reveal by inspiration unto thee; nor wast thou (present) with them then when they concerted their plans together in the process of weaving their plots.

وما أكثر الناس ولو حرصت بمؤمنين
Yet no faith will the greater part of mankind have, however ardently thou dost desire it.

وما تسألهم عليه من أجر إن هو إلا ذكر للعالمين
And no reward dost thou ask of them for this: it is no less than a message for all creatures.

وكأين من آية في السماوات والأرض يمرون عليها وهم عنها معرضون
And how many Signs in the heavens and the earth do they pass by? Yet they turn (their faces) away from them!

وما يؤمن أكثرهم بالله إلا وهم مشركون
And most of them believe not in Allah without associating (other as partners) with Him!

أفأمنوا أن تأتيهم غاشية من عذاب الله أو تأتيهم الساعة بغتة وهم لا يشعرون
Do they then feel secure from the coming against them of the covering veil of the wrath of Allah,- or of the coming against them of the (final) Hour all of a sudden while they perceive not?

قل هذه سبيلي أدعو إلى الله على بصيرة أنا ومن اتبعني وسبحان الله وما أنا من المشركين
Say thou: "This is my way: I do invite unto Allah,- on evidence clear as the seeing with one's eyes,- I and whoever follows me. Glory to Allah! and never will I join gods with Allah!"

وما أرسلنا من قبلك إلا رجالا نوحي إليهم من أهل القرى أفلم يسيروا في الأرض فينظروا كيف كان عاقبة الذين من قبلهم ولدار الآخرة خير للذين اتقوا أفلا تعقلون
Nor did We send before thee (as messengers) any but men, whom we did inspire,- (men) living in human habitations. Do they not travel through the earth, and see what was the end of those before them? But the home of the hereafter is best, for those who do right. Will ye not then understand?

حتى إذا استيأس الرسل وظنوا أنهم قد كذبوا جاءهم نصرنا فنجي من نشاء ولا يرد بأسنا عن القوم المجرمين
(Respite will be granted) until, when the messengers give up hope (of their people) and (come to) think that they were treated as liars, there reaches them Our help, and those whom We will are delivered into safety. But never will be warded off our punishment from those who are in sin.

لقد كان في قصصهم عبرة لأولي الألباب ما كان حديثا يفترى ولكن تصديق الذي بين يديه وتفصيل كل شيء وهدى ورحمة لقوم يؤمنون
There is, in their stories, instruction for men endued with understanding. It is not a tale invented, but a confirmation of what went before it,- a detailed exposition of all things, and a guide and a mercy to any such as believe.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم المر تلك آيات الكتاب والذي أنزل إليك من ربك الحق ولكن أكثر الناس لا يؤمنون
A. L. M. R. These are the signs (or verses) of the Book: that which hath been revealed unto thee from thy Lord is the Truth; but most men believe not.

الله الذي رفع السماوات بغير عمد ترونها ثم استوى على العرش وسخر الشمس والقمر كل يجري لأجل مسمى يدبر الأمر يفصل الآيات لعلكم بلقاء ربكم توقنون
Allah is He Who raised the heavens without any pillars that ye can see; is firmly established on the throne (of authority); He has subjected the sun and the moon (to his Law)! Each one runs (its course) for a term appointed. He doth regulate all affairs, explaining the signs in detail, that ye may believe with certainty in the meeting with your Lord.

وهو الذي مد الأرض وجعل فيها رواسي وأنهارا ومن كل الثمرات جعل فيها زوجين اثنين يغشي الليل النهار إن في ذلك لآيات لقوم يتفكرون
And it is He who spread out the earth, and set thereon mountains standing firm and (flowing) rivers: and fruit of every kind He made in pairs, two and two: He draweth the night as a veil o'er the Day. Behold, verily in these things there are signs for those who consider!

وفي الأرض قطع متجاورات وجنات من أعناب وزرع ونخيل صنوان وغير صنوان يسقى بماء واحد ونفضل بعضها على بعض في الأكل إن في ذلك لآيات لقوم يعقلون
And in the earth are tracts (diverse though) neighbouring, and gardens of vines and fields sown with corn, and palm trees - growing out of single roots or otherwise: watered with the same water, yet some of them We make more excellent than others to eat. Behold, verily in these things there are signs for those who understand!

وإن تعجب فعجب قولهم أإذا كنا ترابا أإنا لفي خلق جديد أولئك الذين كفروا بربهم وأولئك الأغلال في أعناقهم وأولئك أصحاب النار هم فيها خالدون
If thou dost marvel (at their want of faith), strange is their saying: "When we are (actually) dust, shall we indeed then be in a creation renewed?" They are those who deny their Lord! They are those round whose necks will be yokes (of servitude): they will be Companions of the Fire, to dwell therein (for aye)!

ويستعجلونك بالسيئة قبل الحسنة وقد خلت من قبلهم المثلات وإن ربك لذو مغفرة للناس على ظلمهم وإن ربك لشديد العقاب
They ask thee to hasten on the evil in preference to the good: Yet have come to pass, before them, (many) exemplary punishments! But verily thy Lord is full of forgiveness for mankind for their wrong-doing, and verily thy Lord is (also) strict in punishment.

ويقول الذين كفروا لولا أنزل عليه آية من ربه إنما أنت منذر ولكل قوم هاد
And the Unbelievers say: "Why is not a sign sent down to him from his Lord?" But thou art truly a warner, and to every people a guide.

الله يعلم ما تحمل كل أنثى وما تغيض الأرحام وما تزداد وكل شيء عنده بمقدار
Allah doth know what every female (womb) doth bear, by how much the wombs fall short (of their time or number) or do exceed. Every single thing is before His sight, in (due) proportion.

عالم الغيب والشهادة الكبير المتعال
He knoweth the unseen and that which is open: He is the Great, the Most High.

سواء منكم من أسر القول ومن جهر به ومن هو مستخف بالليل وسارب بالنهار
It is the same (to Him) whether any of you conceal his speech or declare it openly; whether he lie hid by night or walk forth freely by day.

له معقبات من بين يديه ومن خلفه يحفظونه من أمر الله إن الله لا يغير ما بقوم حتى يغيروا ما بأنفسهم وإذا أراد الله بقوم سوءا فلا مرد له وما لهم من دونه من وال
For each (such person) there are (angels) in succession, before and behind him: They guard him by command of Allah. Allah does not change a people's lot unless they change what is in their hearts. But when (once) Allah willeth a people's punishment, there can be no turning it back, nor will they find, besides Him, any to protect.

هو الذي يريكم البرق خوفا وطمعا وينشئ السحاب الثقال
It is He Who doth show you the lightning, by way both of fear and of hope: It is He Who doth raise up the clouds, heavy with (fertilising) rain!

ويسبح الرعد بحمده والملائكة من خيفته ويرسل الصواعق فيصيب بها من يشاء وهم يجادلون في الله وهو شديد المحال
Nay, thunder repeateth His praises, and so do the angels, with awe: He flingeth the loud-voiced thunder-bolts, and therewith He striketh whomsoever He will.. yet these (are the men) who (dare to) dispute about Allah, with the strength of His power (supreme)!

له دعوة الحق والذين يدعون من دونه لا يستجيبون لهم بشيء إلا كباسط كفيه إلى الماء ليبلغ فاه وما هو ببالغه وما دعاء الكافرين إلا في ضلال
For Him (alone) is prayer in Truth: any others that they call upon besides Him hear them no more than if they were to stretch forth their hands for water to reach their mouths but it reaches them not: for the prayer of those without Faith is nothing but (futile) wandering (in the mind).

ولله يسجد من في السماوات والأرض طوعا وكرها وظلالهم بالغدو والآصال
Whatever beings there are in the heavens and the earth do prostrate themselves to Allah (Acknowledging subjection),- with good-will or in spite of themselves: so do their shadows in the morning and evenings.

قل من رب السماوات والأرض قل الله قل أفاتخذتم من دونه أولياء لا يملكون لأنفسهم نفعا ولا ضرا قل هل يستوي الأعمى والبصير أم هل تستوي الظلمات والنور أم جعلوا لله شركاء خلقوا كخلقه فتشابه الخلق عليهم قل الله خالق كل شيء وهو الواحد القهار
Say: "Who is the Lord and Sustainer of the heavens and the earth?" Say: "(It is) Allah." Say: "Do ye then take (for worship) protectors other than Him, such as have no power either for good or for harm to themselves?" Say: "Are the blind equal with those who see? Or the depths of darkness equal with light?" Or do they assign to Allah partners who have created (anything) as He has created, so that the creation seemed to them similar? Say: "Allah is the Creator of all things: He is the One, the Supreme and Irresistible."

أنزل من السماء ماء فسالت أودية بقدرها فاحتمل السيل زبدا رابيا ومما يوقدون عليه في النار ابتغاء حلية أو متاع زبد مثله كذلك يضرب الله الحق والباطل فأما الزبد فيذهب جفاء وأما ما ينفع الناس فيمكث في الأرض كذلك يضرب الله الأمثال
He sends down water from the skies, and the channels flow, each according to its measure: But the torrent bears away to foam that mounts up to the surface. Even so, from that (ore) which they heat in the fire, to make ornaments or utensils therewith, there is a scum likewise. Thus doth Allah (by parables) show forth Truth and Vanity. For the scum disappears like forth cast out; while that which is for the good of mankind remains on the earth. Thus doth Allah set forth parables.

للذين استجابوا لربهم الحسنى والذين لم يستجيبوا له لو أن لهم ما في الأرض جميعا ومثله معه لافتدوا به أولئك لهم سوء الحساب ومأواهم جهنم وبئس المهاد
For those who respond to their Lord, are (all) good things. But those who respond not to Him,- Even if they had all that is in the heavens and on earth, and as much more, (in vain) would they offer it for ransom. For them will the reckoning be terrible: their abode will be Hell,- what a bed of misery!

أفمن يعلم أنما أنزل إليك من ربك الحق كمن هو أعمى إنما يتذكر أولو الألباب
Is then one who doth know that that which hath been revealed unto thee from thy Lord is the Truth, like one who is blind? It is those who are endued with understanding that receive admonition;-

الذين يوفون بعهد الله ولا ينقضون الميثاق
Those who fulfil the covenant of Allah and fail not in their plighted word;

والذين يصلون ما أمر الله به أن يوصل ويخشون ربهم ويخافون سوء الحساب
Those who join together those things which Allah hath commanded to be joined, hold their Lord in awe, and fear the terrible reckoning;

والذين صبروا ابتغاء وجه ربهم وأقاموا الصلاة وأنفقوا مما رزقناهم سرا وعلانية ويدرءون بالحسنة السيئة أولئك لهم عقبى الدار
Those who patiently persevere, seeking the countenance of their Lord; Establish regular prayers; spend, out of (the gifts) We have bestowed for their sustenance, secretly and openly; and turn off Evil with good: for such there is the final attainment of the (eternal) home,-

جنات عدن يدخلونها ومن صلح من آبائهم وأزواجهم وذرياتهم والملائكة يدخلون عليهم من كل باب
Gardens of perpetual bliss: they shall enter there, as well as the righteous among their fathers, their spouses, and their offspring: and angels shall enter unto them from every gate (with the salutation):

سلام عليكم بما صبرتم فنعم عقبى الدار
"Peace unto you for that ye persevered in patience! Now how excellent is the final home!"

والذين ينقضون عهد الله من بعد ميثاقه ويقطعون ما أمر الله به أن يوصل ويفسدون في الأرض أولئك لهم اللعنة ولهم سوء الدار
But those who break the Covenant of Allah, after having plighted their word thereto, and cut asunder those things which Allah has commanded to be joined, and work mischief in the land;- on them is the curse; for them is the terrible home!

الله يبسط الرزق لمن يشاء ويقدر وفرحوا بالحياة الدنيا وما الحياة الدنيا في الآخرة إلا متاع
Allah doth enlarge, or grant by (strict) measure, the sustenance (which He giveth) to whomso He pleaseth. (The wordly) rejoice in the life of this world: But the life of this world is but little comfort in the Hereafter.

ويقول الذين كفروا لولا أنزل عليه آية من ربه قل إن الله يضل من يشاء ويهدي إليه من أناب
The Unbelievers say: "Why is not a sign sent down to him from his Lord?" Say: "Truly Allah leaveth, to stray, whom He will; But He guideth to Himself those who turn to Him in penitence,-

الذين آمنوا وتطمئن قلوبهم بذكر الله ألا بذكر الله تطمئن القلوب
"Those who believe, and whose hearts find satisfaction in the remembrance of Allah: for without doubt in the remembrance of Allah do hearts find satisfaction.

الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات طوبى لهم وحسن مآب
"For those who believe and work righteousness, is (every) blessedness, and a beautiful place of (final) return."

كذلك أرسلناك في أمة قد خلت من قبلها أمم لتتلو عليهم الذي أوحينا إليك وهم يكفرون بالرحمن قل هو ربي لا إله إلا هو عليه توكلت وإليه متاب
Thus have we sent thee amongst a People before whom (long since) have (other) Peoples (gone and) passed away; in order that thou mightest rehearse unto them what We send down unto thee by inspiration; yet do they reject (Him), the Most Gracious! Say: "He is my Lord! There is no god but He! On Him is my trust, and to Him do I turn!"

ولو أن قرآنا سيرت به الجبال أو قطعت به الأرض أو كلم به الموتى بل لله الأمر جميعا أفلم ييأس الذين آمنوا أن لو يشاء الله لهدى الناس جميعا ولا يزال الذين كفروا تصيبهم بما صنعوا قارعة أو تحل قريبا من دارهم حتى يأتي وعد الله إن الله لا يخلف الميعاد
If there were a Qur'an with which mountains were moved, or the earth were cloven asunder, or the dead were made to speak, (this would be the one!) But, truly, the command is with Allah in all things! Do not the Believers know, that, had Allah (so) willed, He could have guided all mankind (to the right)? But the Unbelievers,- never will disaster cease to seize them for their (ill) deeds, or to settle close to their homes, until the promise of Allah come to pass, for, verily, Allah will not fail in His promise.

ولقد استهزئ برسل من قبلك فأمليت للذين كفروا ثم أخذتهم فكيف كان عقاب
Mocked were (many) messengers before thee: but I granted respite to the unbelievers, and finally I punished them: Then how (terrible) was my requital!

أفمن هو قائم على كل نفس بما كسبت وجعلوا لله شركاء قل سموهم أم تنبئونه بما لا يعلم في الأرض أم بظاهر من القول بل زين للذين كفروا مكرهم وصدوا عن السبيل ومن يضلل الله فما له من هاد
Is then He who standeth over every soul (and knoweth) all that it doth, (like any others)? And yet they ascribe partners to Allah. Say: "But name them! is it that ye will inform Him of something he knoweth not on earth, or is it (just) a show of words?" Nay! to those who believe not, their pretence seems pleasing, but they are kept back (thereby) from the path. And those whom Allah leaves to stray, no one can guide.

لهم عذاب في الحياة الدنيا ولعذاب الآخرة أشق وما لهم من الله من واق
For them is a penalty in the life of this world, but harder, truly, is the penalty of the Hereafter: and defender have they none against Allah.

مثل الجنة التي وعد المتقون تجري من تحتها الأنهار أكلها دائم وظلها تلك عقبى الذين اتقوا وعقبى الكافرين النار
The parable of the Garden which the righteous are promised!- beneath it flow rivers: perpetual is the enjoyment thereof and the shade therein: such is the end of the Righteous; and the end of Unbelievers in the Fire.

والذين آتيناهم الكتاب يفرحون بما أنزل إليك ومن الأحزاب من ينكر بعضه قل إنما أمرت أن أعبد الله ولا أشرك به إليه أدعو وإليه مآب
Those to whom We have given the Book rejoice at what hath been revealed unto thee: but there are among the clans those who reject a part thereof. Say: "I am commanded to worship Allah, and not to join partners with Him. Unto Him do I call, and unto Him is my return."

وكذلك أنزلناه حكما عربيا ولئن اتبعت أهواءهم بعد ما جاءك من العلم ما لك من الله من ولي ولا واق
Thus have We revealed it to be a judgment of authority in Arabic. Wert thou to follow their (vain) desires after the knowledge which hath reached thee, then wouldst thou find neither protector nor defender against Allah.

ولقد أرسلنا رسلا من قبلك وجعلنا لهم أزواجا وذرية وما كان لرسول أن يأتي بآية إلا بإذن الله لكل أجل كتاب
We did send messengers before thee, and appointed for them wives and children: and it was never the part of a messenger to bring a sign except as Allah permitted (or commanded). For each period is a Book (revealed).

يمحو الله ما يشاء ويثبت وعنده أم الكتاب
Allah doth blot out or confirm what He pleaseth: with Him is the Mother of the Book.

وإن ما نرينك بعض الذي نعدهم أو نتوفينك فإنما عليك البلاغ وعلينا الحساب
Whether We shall show thee (within thy life-time) part of what we promised them or take to ourselves thy soul (before it is all accomplished),- thy duty is to make (the Message) reach them: it is our part to call them to account.

أولم يروا أنا نأتي الأرض ننقصها من أطرافها والله يحكم لا معقب لحكمه وهو سريع الحساب
See they not that We gradually reduce the land (in their control) from its outlying borders? (Where) Allah commands, there is none to put back His Command: and He is swift in calling to account.

وقد مكر الذين من قبلهم فلله المكر جميعا يعلم ما تكسب كل نفس وسيعلم الكفار لمن عقبى الدار
Those before them did (also) devise plots; but in all things the master-planning is Allah's He knoweth the doings of every soul: and soon will the Unbelievers know who gets home in the end.

ويقول الذين كفروا لست مرسلا قل كفى بالله شهيدا بيني وبينكم ومن عنده علم الكتاب
The Unbelievers say: "No messenger art thou." Say: "Enough for a witness between me and you is Allah, and such as have knowledge of the Book."

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الر كتاب أنزلناه إليك لتخرج الناس من الظلمات إلى النور بإذن ربهم إلى صراط العزيز الحميد
A. L. R. A Book which We have revealed unto thee, in order that thou mightest lead mankind out of the depths of darkness into light - by the leave of their Lord - to the Way of (Him) the Exalted in power, worthy of all praise!-

الله الذي له ما في السماوات وما في الأرض وويل للكافرين من عذاب شديد
Of Allah, to Whom do belong all things in the heavens and on earth! But alas for the Unbelievers for a terrible penalty (their Unfaith will bring them)!-

الذين يستحبون الحياة الدنيا على الآخرة ويصدون عن سبيل الله ويبغونها عوجا أولئك في ضلال بعيد
Those who love the life of this world more than the Hereafter, who hinder (men) from the Path of Allah and seek therein something crooked: they are astray by a long distance.

وما أرسلنا من رسول إلا بلسان قومه ليبين لهم فيضل الله من يشاء ويهدي من يشاء وهو العزيز الحكيم
We sent not a messenger except (to teach) in the language of his (own) people, in order to make (things) clear to them. Now Allah leaves straying those whom He pleases and guides whom He pleases: and He is Exalted in power, full of Wisdom.

ولقد أرسلنا موسى بآياتنا أن أخرج قومك من الظلمات إلى النور وذكرهم بأيام الله إن في ذلك لآيات لكل صبار شكور
We sent Moses with Our signs (and the command). "Bring out thy people from the depths of darkness into light, and teach them to remember the Days of Allah." Verily in this there are Signs for such as are firmly patient and constant,- grateful and appreciative.

وإذ قال موسى لقومه اذكروا نعمة الله عليكم إذ أنجاكم من آل فرعون يسومونكم سوء العذاب ويذبحون أبناءكم ويستحيون نساءكم وفي ذلكم بلاء من ربكم عظيم
Remember! Moses said to his people: "Call to mind the favour of Allah to you when He delivered you from the people of Pharaoh: they set you hard tasks and punishments, slaughtered your sons, and let your women-folk live: therein was a tremendous trial from your Lord."

وإذ تأذن ربكم لئن شكرتم لأزيدنكم ولئن كفرتم إن عذابي لشديد
And remember! your Lord caused to be declared (publicly): "If ye are grateful, I will add more (favours) unto you; But if ye show ingratitude, truly My punishment is terrible indeed."

وقال موسى إن تكفروا أنتم ومن في الأرض جميعا فإن الله لغني حميد
And Moses said: "If ye show ingratitude, ye and all on earth together, yet is Allah free of all wants, worthy of all praise.

ألم يأتكم نبأ الذين من قبلكم قوم نوح وعاد وثمود والذين من بعدهم لا يعلمهم إلا الله جاءتهم رسلهم بالبينات فردوا أيديهم في أفواههم وقالوا إنا كفرنا بما أرسلتم به وإنا لفي شك مما تدعوننا إليه مريب
Has not the story reached you, (O people!), of those who (went) before you? - of the people of Noah, and 'Ad, and Thamud? - And of those who (came) after them? None knows them but Allah. To them came messengers with Clear (Signs); but they put their hands up to their mouths, and said: "We do deny (the mission) on which ye have been sent, and we are really in suspicious (disquieting) doubt as to that to which ye invite us."

قالت رسلهم أفي الله شك فاطر السماوات والأرض يدعوكم ليغفر لكم من ذنوبكم ويؤخركم إلى أجل مسمى قالوا إن أنتم إلا بشر مثلنا تريدون أن تصدونا عما كان يعبد آباؤنا فأتونا بسلطان مبين
Their messengers said: "Is there a doubt about Allah, The Creator of the heavens and the earth? It is He Who invites you, in order that He may forgive you your sins and give you respite for a term appointed!" They said: "Ah! ye are no more than human, like ourselves! Ye wish to turn us away from the (gods) our fathers used to worship: then bring us some clear authority."

قالت لهم رسلهم إن نحن إلا بشر مثلكم ولكن الله يمن على من يشاء من عباده وما كان لنا أن نأتيكم بسلطان إلا بإذن الله وعلى الله فليتوكل المؤمنون
Their messengers said to them: "True, we are human like yourselves, but Allah doth grant His grace to such of his servants as He pleases. It is not for us to bring you an authority except as Allah permits. And on Allah let all men of faith put their trust.

وما لنا ألا نتوكل على الله وقد هدانا سبلنا ولنصبرن على ما آذيتمونا وعلى الله فليتوكل المتوكلون
"No reason have we why we should not put our trust on Allah. Indeed He Has guided us to the Ways we (follow). We shall certainly bear with patience all the hurt you may cause us. For those who put their trust should put their trust on Allah."

وقال الذين كفروا لرسلهم لنخرجنكم من أرضنا أو لتعودن في ملتنا فأوحى إليهم ربهم لنهلكن الظالمين
And the Unbelievers said to their messengers: "Be sure we shall drive you out of our land, or ye shall return to our religion." But their Lord inspired (this Message) to them: "Verily We shall cause the wrong-doers to perish!

ولنسكننكم الأرض من بعدهم ذلك لمن خاف مقامي وخاف وعيد
"And verily We shall cause you to abide in the land, and succeed them. This for such as fear the Time when they shall stand before My tribunal,- such as fear the punishment denounced."

واستفتحوا وخاب كل جبار عنيد
But they sought victory and decision (there and then), and frustration was the lot of every powerful obstinate transgressor.

من ورائه جهنم ويسقى من ماء صديد
In front of such a one is Hell, and he is given, for drink, boiling fetid water.

يتجرعه ولا يكاد يسيغه ويأتيه الموت من كل مكان وما هو بميت ومن ورائه عذاب غليظ
In gulps will he sip it, but never will he be near swallowing it down his throat: death will come to him from every quarter, yet will he not die: and in front of him will be a chastisement unrelenting.

مثل الذين كفروا بربهم أعمالهم كرماد اشتدت به الريح في يوم عاصف لا يقدرون مما كسبوا على شيء ذلك هو الضلال البعيد
The parable of those who reject their Lord is that their works are as ashes, on which the wind blows furiously on a tempestuous day: No power have they over aught that they have earned: that is the straying far, far (from the goal).

ألم تر أن الله خلق السماوات والأرض بالحق إن يشأ يذهبكم ويأت بخلق جديد
Seest thou not that Allah created the heavens and the earth in Truth? If He so will, He can remove you and put (in your place) a new creation?

وما ذلك على الله بعزيز
Nor is that for Allah any great matter.

وبرزوا لله جميعا فقال الضعفاء للذين استكبروا إنا كنا لكم تبعا فهل أنتم مغنون عنا من عذاب الله من شيء قالوا لو هدانا الله لهديناكم سواء علينا أجزعنا أم صبرنا ما لنا من محيص
They will all be marshalled before Allah together: then will the weak say to those who were arrogant, "For us, we but followed you; can ye then avail us to all against the wrath of Allah?" They will reply, "If we had received the Guidance of Allah, we should have given it to you: to us it makes no difference (now) whether we rage, or bear (these torments) with patience: for ourselves there is no way of escape."

وقال الشيطان لما قضي الأمر إن الله وعدكم وعد الحق ووعدتكم فأخلفتكم وما كان لي عليكم من سلطان إلا أن دعوتكم فاستجبتم لي فلا تلوموني ولوموا أنفسكم ما أنا بمصرخكم وما أنتم بمصرخي إني كفرت بما أشركتمون من قبل إن الظالمين لهم عذاب أليم
And Satan will say when the matter is decided: "It was Allah Who gave you a promise of Truth: I too promised, but I failed in my promise to you. I had no authority over you except to call you but ye listened to me: then reproach not me, but reproach your own souls. I cannot listen to your cries, nor can ye listen to mine. I reject your former act in associating me with Allah. For wrong-doers there must be a grievous penalty."

وأدخل الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها بإذن ربهم تحيتهم فيها سلام
But those who believe and work righteousness will be admitted to gardens beneath which rivers flow,- to dwell therein for aye with the leave of their Lord. Their greeting therein will be: "Peace!"

ألم تر كيف ضرب الله مثلا كلمة طيبة كشجرة طيبة أصلها ثابت وفرعها في السماء
Seest thou not how Allah sets forth a parable? - A goodly word like a goodly tree, whose root is firmly fixed, and its branches (reach) to the heavens,- of its Lord. So Allah sets forth parables for men, in order that they may receive admonition.

تؤتي أكلها كل حين بإذن ربها ويضرب الله الأمثال للناس لعلهم يتذكرون
It brings forth its fruit at all times, by the leave of its Lord. So Allah sets forth parables for men, in order that they may receive admonition.

ومثل كلمة خبيثة كشجرة خبيثة اجتثت من فوق الأرض ما لها من قرار
And the parable of an evil Word is that of an evil tree: It is torn up by the root from the surface of the earth: it has no stability.

يثبت الله الذين آمنوا بالقول الثابت في الحياة الدنيا وفي الآخرة ويضل الله الظالمين ويفعل الله ما يشاء
Allah will establish in strength those who believe, with the word that stands firm, in this world and in the Hereafter; but Allah will leave, to stray, those who do wrong: Allah doeth what He willeth.

ألم تر إلى الذين بدلوا نعمت الله كفرا وأحلوا قومهم دار البوار
Hast thou not turned thy vision to those who have changed the favour of Allah. Into blasphemy and caused their people to descend to the House of Perdition?-

جهنم يصلونها وبئس القرار
Into Hell? They will burn therein,- an evil place to stay in!

وجعلوا لله أندادا ليضلوا عن سبيله قل تمتعوا فإن مصيركم إلى النار
And they set up (idols) as equal to Allah, to mislead (men) from the Path! Say: "Enjoy (your brief power)! But verily ye are making straightway for Hell!"

قل لعبادي الذين آمنوا يقيموا الصلاة وينفقوا مما رزقناهم سرا وعلانية من قبل أن يأتي يوم لا بيع فيه ولا خلال
Speak to my servants who have believed, that they may establish regular prayers, and spend (in charity) out of the sustenance we have given them, secretly and openly, before the coming of a Day in which there will be neither mutual bargaining nor befriending.

الله الذي خلق السماوات والأرض وأنزل من السماء ماء فأخرج به من الثمرات رزقا لكم وسخر لكم الفلك لتجري في البحر بأمره وسخر لكم الأنهار
It is Allah Who hath created the heavens and the earth and sendeth down rain from the skies, and with it bringeth out fruits wherewith to feed you; it is He Who hath made the ships subject to you, that they may sail through the sea by His command; and the rivers (also) hath He made subject to you.

وسخر لكم الشمس والقمر دائبين وسخر لكم الليل والنهار
And He hath made subject to you the sun and the moon, both diligently pursuing their courses; and the night and the day hath he (also) made subject to you.

وآتاكم من كل ما سألتموه وإن تعدوا نعمت الله لا تحصوها إن الإنسان لظلوم كفار
And He giveth you of all that ye ask for. But if ye count the favours of Allah, never will ye be able to number them. Verily, man is given up to injustice and ingratitude.

وإذ قال إبراهيم رب اجعل هذا البلد آمنا واجنبني وبني أن نعبد الأصنام
Remember Abraham said: "O my Lord! make this city one of peace and security: and preserve me and my sons from worshipping idols.

رب إنهن أضللن كثيرا من الناس فمن تبعني فإنه مني ومن عصاني فإنك غفور رحيم
"O my Lord! they have indeed led astray many among mankind; He then who follows my (ways) is of me, and he that disobeys me,- but Thou art indeed Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

ربنا إني أسكنت من ذريتي بواد غير ذي زرع عند بيتك المحرم ربنا ليقيموا الصلاة فاجعل أفئدة من الناس تهوي إليهم وارزقهم من الثمرات لعلهم يشكرون
"O our Lord! I have made some of my offspring to dwell in a valley without cultivation, by Thy Sacred House; in order, O our Lord, that they may establish regular Prayer: so fill the hearts of some among men with love towards them, and feed them with fruits: so that they may give thanks.

ربنا إنك تعلم ما نخفي وما نعلن وما يخفى على الله من شيء في الأرض ولا في السماء
"O our Lord! truly Thou dost know what we conceal and what we reveal: for nothing whatever is hidden from Allah, whether on earth or in heaven.

الحمد لله الذي وهب لي على الكبر إسماعيل وإسحاق إن ربي لسميع الدعاء
"Praise be to Allah, Who hath granted unto me in old age Isma'il and Isaac: for truly my Lord is He, the Hearer of Prayer!

رب اجعلني مقيم الصلاة ومن ذريتي ربنا وتقبل دعاء
O my Lord! make me one who establishes regular Prayer, and also (raise such) among my offspring O our Lord! and accept Thou my Prayer.

ربنا اغفر لي ولوالدي وللمؤمنين يوم يقوم الحساب
"O our Lord! cover (us) with Thy Forgiveness - me, my parents, and (all) Believers, on the Day that the Reckoning will be established!

ولا تحسبن الله غافلا عما يعمل الظالمون إنما يؤخرهم ليوم تشخص فيه الأبصار
Think not that Allah doth not heed the deeds of those who do wrong. He but giveth them respite against a Day when the eyes will fixedly stare in horror,-

مهطعين مقنعي رءوسهم لا يرتد إليهم طرفهم وأفئدتهم هواء
They running forward with necks outstretched, their heads uplifted, their gaze returning not towards them, and their hearts a (gaping) void!

وأنذر الناس يوم يأتيهم العذاب فيقول الذين ظلموا ربنا أخرنا إلى أجل قريب نجب دعوتك ونتبع الرسل أولم تكونوا أقسمتم من قبل ما لكم من زوال
So warn mankind of the Day when the Wrath will reach them: then will the wrong-doers say: "Our Lord! respite us (if only) for a short term: we will answer Thy call, and follow the messengers!" "What! were ye not wont to swear aforetime that ye should suffer no decline?

وسكنتم في مساكن الذين ظلموا أنفسهم وتبين لكم كيف فعلنا بهم وضربنا لكم الأمثال
"And ye dwelt in the dwellings of men who wronged their own souls; ye were clearly shown how We dealt with them; and We put forth (many) parables in your behoof!"

وقد مكروا مكرهم وعند الله مكرهم وإن كان مكرهم لتزول منه الجبال
Mighty indeed were the plots which they made, but their plots were (well) within the sight of Allah, even though they were such as to shake the hills!

فلا تحسبن الله مخلف وعده رسله إن الله عزيز ذو انتقام
Never think that Allah would fail his messengers in His promise: for Allah is Exalted in power, - the Lord of Retribution.

يوم تبدل الأرض غير الأرض والسماوات وبرزوا لله الواحد القهار
One day the earth will be changed to a different earth, and so will be the heavens, and (men) will be marshalled forth, before Allah, the One, the Irresistible;

وترى المجرمين يومئذ مقرنين في الأصفاد
And thou wilt see the sinners that day bound together in fetters;-

سرابيلهم من قطران وتغشى وجوههم النار
Their garments of liquid pitch, and their faces covered with Fire;

ليجزي الله كل نفس ما كسبت إن الله سريع الحساب
That Allah may requite each soul according to its deserts; and verily Allah is swift in calling to account.

هذا بلاغ للناس ولينذروا به وليعلموا أنما هو إله واحد وليذكر أولو الألباب
Here is a Message for mankind: Let them take warning therefrom, and let them know that He is (no other than) One Allah: let men of understanding take heed.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الر تلك آيات الكتاب وقرآن مبين
A. L. R. These are the Ayats of Revelation,- of a Qur'an that makes things clear.

ربما يود الذين كفروا لو كانوا مسلمين
Again and again will those who disbelieve, wish that they had bowed (to Allah's will) in Islam.

ذرهم يأكلوا ويتمتعوا ويلههم الأمل فسوف يعلمون
Leave them alone, to enjoy (the good things of this life) and to please themselves: let (false) hope amuse them: soon will knowledge (undeceive them).

وما أهلكنا من قرية إلا ولها كتاب معلوم
Never did We destroy a population that had not a term decreed and assigned beforehand.

ما تسبق من أمة أجلها وما يستأخرون
Neither can a people anticipate its term, nor delay it.

وقالوا يا أيها الذي نزل عليه الذكر إنك لمجنون
They say: "O thou to whom the Message is being revealed! truly thou art mad (or possessed)!

لو ما تأتينا بالملائكة إن كنت من الصادقين
"Why bringest thou not angels to us if it be that thou hast the Truth?"

ما ننزل الملائكة إلا بالحق وما كانوا إذا منظرين
We send not the angels down except for just cause: if they came (to the ungodly), behold! no respite would they have!

إنا نحن نزلنا الذكر وإنا له لحافظون
We have, without doubt, sent down the Message; and We will assuredly guard it (from corruption).

ولقد أرسلنا من قبلك في شيع الأولين
We did send messengers before thee amongst the religious sects of old:

وما يأتيهم من رسول إلا كانوا به يستهزئون
But never came a messenger to them but they mocked him.

كذلك نسلكه في قلوب المجرمين
Even so do we let it creep into the hearts of the sinners -

لا يؤمنون به وقد خلت سنة الأولين
That they should not believe in the (Message); but the ways of the ancients have passed away.

ولو فتحنا عليهم بابا من السماء فظلوا فيه يعرجون
Even if We opened out to them a gate from heaven, and they were to continue (all day) ascending therein,

لقالوا إنما سكرت أبصارنا بل نحن قوم مسحورون
They would only say: "Our eyes have been intoxicated: Nay, we have been bewitched by sorcery."

ولقد جعلنا في السماء بروجا وزيناها للناظرين
It is We Who have set out the zodiacal signs in the heavens, and made them fair-seeming to (all) beholders;

وحفظناها من كل شيطان رجيم
And (moreover) We have guarded them from every cursed devil:

إلا من استرق السمع فأتبعه شهاب مبين
But any that gains a hearing by stealth, is pursued by a flaming fire, bright (to see).

والأرض مددناها وألقينا فيها رواسي وأنبتنا فيها من كل شيء موزون
And the earth We have spread out (like a carpet); set thereon mountains firm and immovable; and produced therein all kinds of things in due balance.

وجعلنا لكم فيها معايش ومن لستم له برازقين
And We have provided therein means of subsistence,- for you and for those for whose sustenance ye are not responsible.

وإن من شيء إلا عندنا خزائنه وما ننزله إلا بقدر معلوم
And there is not a thing but its (sources and) treasures (inexhaustible) are with Us; but We only send down thereof in due and ascertainable measures.

وأرسلنا الرياح لواقح فأنزلنا من السماء ماء فأسقيناكموه وما أنتم له بخازنين
And We send the fecundating winds, then cause the rain to descend from the sky, therewith providing you with water (in abundance), though ye are not the guardians of its stores.

وإنا لنحن نحيي ونميت ونحن الوارثون
And verily, it is We Who give life, and Who give death: it is We Who remain inheritors (after all else passes away).

ولقد علمنا المستقدمين منكم ولقد علمنا المستأخرين
To Us are known those of you who hasten forward, and those who lag behind.

وإن ربك هو يحشرهم إنه حكيم عليم
Assuredly it is thy Lord Who will gather them together: for He is perfect in Wisdom and Knowledge.

ولقد خلقنا الإنسان من صلصال من حمإ مسنون
We created man from sounding clay, from mud moulded into shape;

والجان خلقناه من قبل من نار السموم
And the Jinn race, We had created before, from the fire of a scorching wind.

وإذ قال ربك للملائكة إني خالق بشرا من صلصال من حمإ مسنون
Behold! thy Lord said to the angels: "I am about to create man, from sounding clay from mud moulded into shape;

فإذا سويته ونفخت فيه من روحي فقعوا له ساجدين
"When I have fashioned him (in due proportion) and breathed into him of My spirit, fall ye down in obeisance unto him."

فسجد الملائكة كلهم أجمعون
So the angels prostrated themselves, all of them together:

إلا إبليس أبى أن يكون مع الساجدين
Not so Iblis: he refused to be among those who prostrated themselves.

قال يا إبليس ما لك ألا تكون مع الساجدين
(Allah) said: "O Iblis! what is your reason for not being among those who prostrated themselves?"

قال لم أكن لأسجد لبشر خلقته من صلصال من حمإ مسنون
(Iblis) said: "I am not one to prostrate myself to man, whom Thou didst create from sounding clay, from mud moulded into shape."

قال فاخرج منها فإنك رجيم
(Allah) said: "Then get thee out from here; for thou art rejected, accursed.

وإن عليك اللعنة إلى يوم الدين
"And the curse shall be on thee till the day of Judgment."

قال رب فأنظرني إلى يوم يبعثون
(Iblis) said: "O my Lord! give me then respite till the Day the (dead) are raised."

قال فإنك من المنظرين
(Allah) said: "Respite is granted thee

إلى يوم الوقت المعلوم
"Till the Day of the Time appointed."

قال رب بما أغويتني لأزينن لهم في الأرض ولأغوينهم أجمعين
(Iblis) said: "O my Lord! because Thou hast put me in the wrong, I will make (wrong) fair-seeming to them on the earth, and I will put them all in the wrong,-

إلا عبادك منهم المخلصين
"Except Thy servants among them, sincere and purified (by Thy Grace)."

قال هذا صراط علي مستقيم
(Allah) said: "This (way of My sincere servants) is indeed a way that leads straight to Me.

إن عبادي ليس لك عليهم سلطان إلا من اتبعك من الغاوين
"For over My servants no authority shalt thou have, except such as put themselves in the wrong and follow thee."

وإن جهنم لموعدهم أجمعين
And verily, Hell is the promised abode for them all!

لها سبعة أبواب لكل باب منهم جزء مقسوم
To it are seven gates: for each of those gates is a (special) class (of sinners) assigned.

إن المتقين في جنات وعيون
The righteous (will be) amid gardens and fountains (of clear-flowing water).

ادخلوها بسلام آمنين
(Their greeting will be): "Enter ye here in peace and security."

ونزعنا ما في صدورهم من غل إخوانا على سرر متقابلين
And We shall remove from their hearts any lurking sense of injury: (they will be) brothers (joyfully) facing each other on thrones (of dignity).

لا يمسهم فيها نصب وما هم منها بمخرجين
There no sense of fatigue shall touch them, nor shall they (ever) be asked to leave.

نبئ عبادي أني أنا الغفور الرحيم
Tell My servants that I am indeed the Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful;

وأن عذابي هو العذاب الأليم
And that My Penalty will be indeed the most grievous Penalty.

ونبئهم عن ضيف إبراهيم
Tell them about the guests of Abraham.

إذ دخلوا عليه فقالوا سلاما قال إنا منكم وجلون
When they entered his presence and said, "Peace!" He said, "We feel afraid of you!"

قالوا لا توجل إنا نبشرك بغلام عليم
They said: "Fear not! We give thee glad tidings of a son endowed with wisdom."

قال أبشرتموني على أن مسني الكبر فبم تبشرون
He said: "Do ye give me glad tidings that old age has seized me? Of what, then, is your good news?"

قالوا بشرناك بالحق فلا تكن من القانطين
They said: "We give thee glad tidings in truth: be not then in despair!"

قال ومن يقنط من رحمة ربه إلا الضالون
He said: "And who despairs of the mercy of his Lord, but such as go astray?"

قال فما خطبكم أيها المرسلون
Abraham said: "What then is the business on which ye (have come), O ye messengers (of Allah)?"

قالوا إنا أرسلنا إلى قوم مجرمين
They said: "We have been sent to a people (deep) in sin,

إلا آل لوط إنا لمنجوهم أجمعين
"Excepting the adherents of Lut: them we are certainly (charged) to save (from harm),- All -

إلا امرأته قدرنا إنها لمن الغابرين
"Except his wife, who, We have ascertained, will be among those who will lag behind."

فلما جاء آل لوط المرسلون
At length when the messengers arrived among the adherents of Lut,

قال إنكم قوم منكرون
He said: "Ye appear to be uncommon folk."

قالوا بل جئناك بما كانوا فيه يمترون
They said: "Yea, we have come to thee to accomplish that of which they doubt.

وأتيناك بالحق وإنا لصادقون
"We have brought to thee that which is inevitably due, and assuredly we tell the truth.

فأسر بأهلك بقطع من الليل واتبع أدبارهم ولا يلتفت منكم أحد وامضوا حيث تؤمرون
"Then travel by night with thy household, when a portion of the night (yet remains), and do thou bring up the rear: let no one amongst you look back, but pass on whither ye are ordered."

وقضينا إليه ذلك الأمر أن دابر هؤلاء مقطوع مصبحين
And We made known this decree to him, that the last remnants of those (sinners) should be cut off by the morning.

وجاء أهل المدينة يستبشرون
The inhabitants of the city came in (mad) joy (at news of the young men).

قال إن هؤلاء ضيفي فلا تفضحون
Lut said: "These are my guests: disgrace me not:

واتقوا الله ولا تخزون
"But fear Allah, and shame me not."

قالوا أولم ننهك عن العالمين
They said: "Did we not forbid thee (to speak) for all and sundry?"

قال هؤلاء بناتي إن كنتم فاعلين
He said: "There are my daughters (to marry), if ye must act (so)."

لعمرك إنهم لفي سكرتهم يعمهون
Verily, by thy life (O Prophet), in their wild intoxication, they wander in distraction, to and fro.

فأخذتهم الصيحة مشرقين
But the (mighty) Blast overtook them before morning,

فجعلنا عاليها سافلها وأمطرنا عليهم حجارة من سجيل
And We turned (the cities) upside down, and rained down on them brimstones hard as baked clay.

إن في ذلك لآيات للمتوسمين
Behold! in this are Signs for those who by tokens do understand.

وإنها لبسبيل مقيم
And the (cities were) right on the high-road.

إن في ذلك لآية للمؤمنين
Behold! in this is a sign for those who believed.

وإن كان أصحاب الأيكة لظالمين
And the Companions of the Wood were also wrong-doers;

فانتقمنا منهم وإنهما لبإمام مبين
So We exacted retribution from them. They were both on an open highway, plain to see.

ولقد كذب أصحاب الحجر المرسلين
The Companions of the Rocky Tract also rejected the messengers:

وآتيناهم آياتنا فكانوا عنها معرضين
We sent them Our Signs, but they persisted in turning away from them.

وكانوا ينحتون من الجبال بيوتا آمنين
Out of the mountains did they hew (their) edifices, (feeling themselves) secure.

فأخذتهم الصيحة مصبحين
But the (mighty) Blast seized them of a morning,

فما أغنى عنهم ما كانوا يكسبون
And of no avail to them was all that they did (with such art and care)!

وما خلقنا السماوات والأرض وما بينهما إلا بالحق وإن الساعة لآتية فاصفح الصفح الجميل
We created not the heavens, the earth, and all between them, but for just ends. And the Hour is surely coming (when this will be manifest). So overlook (any human faults) with gracious forgiveness.

إن ربك هو الخلاق العليم
For verily it is thy Lord who is the Master-Creator, knowing all things.

ولقد آتيناك سبعا من المثاني والقرآن العظيم
And We have bestowed upon thee the Seven Oft-repeated (verses) and the Grand Qur'an.

لا تمدن عينيك إلى ما متعنا به أزواجا منهم ولا تحزن عليهم واخفض جناحك للمؤمنين
Strain not thine eyes. (Wistfully) at what We have bestowed on certain classes of them, nor grieve over them: but lower thy wing (in gentleness) to the believers.

وقل إني أنا النذير المبين
And say: "I am indeed he that warneth openly and without ambiguity,"-

كما أنزلنا على المقتسمين
(Of just such wrath) as We sent down on those who divided (Scripture into arbitrary parts),-

الذين جعلوا القرآن عضين
(So also on such) as have made Qur'an into shreds (as they please).

فوربك لنسألنهم أجمعين
Therefore, by the Lord, We will, of a surety, call them to account,

عما كانوا يعملون
For all their deeds.

فاصدع بما تؤمر وأعرض عن المشركين
Therefore expound openly what thou art commanded, and turn away from those who join false gods with Allah.

إنا كفيناك المستهزئين
For sufficient are We unto thee against those who scoff,-

الذين يجعلون مع الله إلها آخر فسوف يعلمون
Those who adopt, with Allah, another god: but soon will they come to know.

ولقد نعلم أنك يضيق صدرك بما يقولون
We do indeed know how thy heart is distressed at what they say.

فسبح بحمد ربك وكن من الساجدين
But celebrate the praises of thy Lord, and be of those who prostrate themselves in adoration.

واعبد ربك حتى يأتيك اليقين
And serve thy Lord until there come unto thee the Hour that is Certain.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم أتى أمر الله فلا تستعجلوه سبحانه وتعالى عما يشركون
(Inevitable) cometh (to pass) the Command of Allah: seek ye not then to hasten it: Glory to Him, and far is He above having the partners they ascribe unto Him!

ينزل الملائكة بالروح من أمره على من يشاء من عباده أن أنذروا أنه لا إله إلا أنا فاتقون
He doth send down His angels with inspiration of His Command, to such of His servants as He pleaseth, (saying): "Warn (Man) that there is no god but I: so do your duty unto Me."

خلق السماوات والأرض بالحق تعالى عما يشركون
He has created the heavens and the earth for just ends: Far is He above having the partners they ascribe to Him!

خلق الإنسان من نطفة فإذا هو خصيم مبين
He has created man from a sperm-drop; and behold this same (man) becomes an open disputer!

والأنعام خلقها لكم فيها دفء ومنافع ومنها تأكلون
And cattle He has created for you (men): from them ye derive warmth, and numerous benefits, and of their (meat) ye eat.

ولكم فيها جمال حين تريحون وحين تسرحون
And ye have a sense of pride and beauty in them as ye drive them home in the evening, and as ye lead them forth to pasture in the morning.

وتحمل أثقالكم إلى بلد لم تكونوا بالغيه إلا بشق الأنفس إن ربكم لرءوف رحيم
And they carry your heavy loads to lands that ye could not (otherwise) reach except with souls distressed: for your Lord is indeed Most Kind, Most Merciful,

والخيل والبغال والحمير لتركبوها وزينة ويخلق ما لا تعلمون
And (He has created) horses, mules, and donkeys, for you to ride and use for show; and He has created (other) things of which ye have no knowledge.

وعلى الله قصد السبيل ومنها جائر ولو شاء لهداكم أجمعين
And unto Allah leads straight the Way, but there are ways that turn aside: if Allah had willed, He could have guided all of you.

هو الذي أنزل من السماء ماء لكم منه شراب ومنه شجر فيه تسيمون
It is He who sends down rain from the sky: from it ye drink, and out of it (grows) the vegetation on which ye feed your cattle.

ينبت لكم به الزرع والزيتون والنخيل والأعناب ومن كل الثمرات إن في ذلك لآية لقوم يتفكرون
With it He produces for you corn, olives, date-palms, grapes and every kind of fruit: verily in this is a sign for those who give thought.

وسخر لكم الليل والنهار والشمس والقمر والنجوم مسخرات بأمره إن في ذلك لآيات لقوم يعقلون
He has made subject to you the Night and the Day; the sun and the moon; and the stars are in subjection by His Command: verily in this are Signs for men who are wise.

وما ذرأ لكم في الأرض مختلفا ألوانه إن في ذلك لآية لقوم يذكرون
And the things on this earth which He has multiplied in varying colours (and qualities): verily in this is a sign for men who celebrate the praises of Allah (in gratitude).

وهو الذي سخر البحر لتأكلوا منه لحما طريا وتستخرجوا منه حلية تلبسونها وترى الفلك مواخر فيه ولتبتغوا من فضله ولعلكم تشكرون
It is He Who has made the sea subject, that ye may eat thereof flesh that is fresh and tender, and that ye may extract therefrom ornaments to wear; and thou seest the ships therein that plough the waves, that ye may seek (thus) of the bounty of Allah and that ye may be grateful.

وألقى في الأرض رواسي أن تميد بكم وأنهارا وسبلا لعلكم تهتدون
And He has set up on the earth mountains standing firm, lest it should shake with you; and rivers and roads; that ye may guide yourselves;

وعلامات وبالنجم هم يهتدون
And marks and sign-posts; and by the stars (men) guide themselves.

أفمن يخلق كمن لا يخلق أفلا تذكرون
Is then He Who creates like one that creates not? Will ye not receive admonition?

وإن تعدوا نعمة الله لا تحصوها إن الله لغفور رحيم
If ye would count up the favours of Allah, never would ye be able to number them: for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

والله يعلم ما تسرون وما تعلنون
And Allah doth know what ye conceal, and what ye reveal.

والذين يدعون من دون الله لا يخلقون شيئا وهم يخلقون
Those whom they invoke besides Allah create nothing and are themselves created.

أموات غير أحياء وما يشعرون أيان يبعثون
(They are things) dead, lifeless: nor do they know when they will be raised up.

إلهكم إله واحد فالذين لا يؤمنون بالآخرة قلوبهم منكرة وهم مستكبرون
Your Allah is one Allah: as to those who believe not in the Hereafter, their hearts refuse to know, and they are arrogant.

لا جرم أن الله يعلم ما يسرون وما يعلنون إنه لا يحب المستكبرين
Undoubtedly Allah doth know what they conceal, and what they reveal: verily He loveth not the arrogant.

وإذا قيل لهم ماذا أنزل ربكم قالوا أساطير الأولين
When it is said to them, "What is it that your Lord has revealed?" they say, "Tales of the ancients!"

ليحملوا أوزارهم كاملة يوم القيامة ومن أوزار الذين يضلونهم بغير علم ألا ساء ما يزرون
Let them bear, on the Day of Judgment, their own burdens in full, and also (something) of the burdens of those without knowledge, whom they misled. Alas, how grievous the burdens they will bear!

قد مكر الذين من قبلهم فأتى الله بنيانهم من القواعد فخر عليهم السقف من فوقهم وأتاهم العذاب من حيث لا يشعرون
Those before them did also plot (against Allah's Way): but Allah took their structures from their foundations, and the roof fell down on them from above; and the Wrath seized them from directions they did not perceive.

ثم يوم القيامة يخزيهم ويقول أين شركائي الذين كنتم تشاقون فيهم قال الذين أوتوا العلم إن الخزي اليوم والسوء على الكافرين
Then, on the Day of Judgment, He will cover them with shame, and say: "Where are My 'partners' concerning whom ye used to dispute (with the godly)?" Those endued with knowledge will say: "This Day, indeed, are the Unbelievers covered with shame and misery,-

الذين تتوفاهم الملائكة ظالمي أنفسهم فألقوا السلم ما كنا نعمل من سوء بلى إن الله عليم بما كنتم تعملون
"(Namely) those whose lives the angels take in a state of wrong-doing to their own souls." Then would they offer submission (with the pretence), "We did no evil (knowingly)." (The angels will reply), "Nay, but verily Allah knoweth all that ye did;

فادخلوا أبواب جهنم خالدين فيها فلبئس مثوى المتكبرين
"So enter the gates of Hell, to dwell therein. Thus evil indeed is the abode of the arrogant."

وقيل للذين اتقوا ماذا أنزل ربكم قالوا خيرا للذين أحسنوا في هذه الدنيا حسنة ولدار الآخرة خير ولنعم دار المتقين
To the righteous (when) it is said, "What is it that your Lord has revealed?" they say, "All that is good." To those who do good, there is good in this world, and the Home of the Hereafter is even better and excellent indeed is the Home of the righteous,-

جنات عدن يدخلونها تجري من تحتها الأنهار لهم فيها ما يشاءون كذلك يجزي الله المتقين
Gardens of Eternity which they will enter: beneath them flow (pleasant) rivers: they will have therein all that they wish: thus doth Allah reward the righteous,-

الذين تتوفاهم الملائكة طيبين يقولون سلام عليكم ادخلوا الجنة بما كنتم تعملون
(Namely) those whose lives the angels take in a state of purity, saying (to them), "Peace be on you; enter ye the Garden, because of (the good) which ye did (in the world)."

هل ينظرون إلا أن تأتيهم الملائكة أو يأتي أمر ربك كذلك فعل الذين من قبلهم وما ظلمهم الله ولكن كانوا أنفسهم يظلمون
Do the (ungodly) wait until the angels come to them, or there comes the Command of thy Lord (for their doom)? So did those who went before them. But Allah wronged them not: nay, they wronged their own souls.

فأصابهم سيئات ما عملوا وحاق بهم ما كانوا به يستهزئون
But the evil results of their deeds overtook them, and that very (Wrath) at which they had scoffed hemmed them in.

وقال الذين أشركوا لو شاء الله ما عبدنا من دونه من شيء نحن ولا آباؤنا ولا حرمنا من دونه من شيء كذلك فعل الذين من قبلهم فهل على الرسل إلا البلاغ المبين
The worshippers of false gods say: "If Allah had so willed, we should not have worshipped aught but Him - neither we nor our fathers,- nor should we have prescribed prohibitions other than His." So did those who went before them. But what is the mission of messengers but to preach the Clear Message?

ولقد بعثنا في كل أمة رسولا أن اعبدوا الله واجتنبوا الطاغوت فمنهم من هدى الله ومنهم من حقت عليه الضلالة فسيروا في الأرض فانظروا كيف كان عاقبة المكذبين
For We assuredly sent amongst every People a messenger, (with the Command), "Serve Allah, and eschew Evil": of the People were some whom Allah guided, and some on whom error became inevitably (established). So travel through the earth, and see what was the end of those who denied (the Truth).

إن تحرص على هداهم فإن الله لا يهدي من يضل وما لهم من ناصرين
If thou art anxious for their guidance, yet Allah guideth not such as He leaves to stray, and there is none to help them.

وأقسموا بالله جهد أيمانهم لا يبعث الله من يموت بلى وعدا عليه حقا ولكن أكثر الناس لا يعلمون
They swear their strongest oaths by Allah, that Allah will not raise up those who die: Nay, but it is a promise (binding) on Him in truth: but most among mankind realise it not.

ليبين لهم الذي يختلفون فيه وليعلم الذين كفروا أنهم كانوا كاذبين
(They must be raised up), in order that He may manifest to them the truth of that wherein they differ, and that the rejecters of Truth may realise that they had indeed (surrendered to) Falsehood.

إنما قولنا لشيء إذا أردناه أن نقول له كن فيكون
For to anything which We have willed, We but say the word, "Be", and it is.

والذين هاجروا في الله من بعد ما ظلموا لنبوئنهم في الدنيا حسنة ولأجر الآخرة أكبر لو كانوا يعلمون
To those who leave their homes in the cause of Allah, after suffering oppression,- We will assuredly give a goodly home in this world; but truly the reward of the Hereafter will be greater. If they only realised (this)!

الذين صبروا وعلى ربهم يتوكلون
(They are) those who persevere in patience, and put their trust on their Lord.

وما أرسلنا من قبلك إلا رجالا نوحي إليهم فاسألوا أهل الذكر إن كنتم لا تعلمون
And before thee also the messengers We sent were but men, to whom We granted inspiration: if ye realise this not, ask of those who possess the Message.

بالبينات والزبر وأنزلنا إليك الذكر لتبين للناس ما نزل إليهم ولعلهم يتفكرون
(We sent them) with Clear Signs and Books of dark prophecies; and We have sent down unto thee (also) the Message; that thou mayest explain clearly to men what is sent for them, and that they may give thought.

أفأمن الذين مكروا السيئات أن يخسف الله بهم الأرض أو يأتيهم العذاب من حيث لا يشعرون
Do then those who devise evil (plots) feel secure that Allah will not cause the earth to swallow them up, or that the Wrath will not seize them from directions they little perceive?-

أو يأخذهم في تقلبهم فما هم بمعجزين
Or that He may not call them to account in the midst of their goings to and fro, without a chance of their frustrating Him?-

أو يأخذهم على تخوف فإن ربكم لرءوف رحيم
Or that He may not call them to account by a process of slow wastage - for thy Lord is indeed full of kindness and mercy.

أولم يروا إلى ما خلق الله من شيء يتفيأ ظلاله عن اليمين والشمائل سجدا لله وهم داخرون
Do they not look at Allah's creation, (even) among (inanimate) things,- How their (very) shadows turn round, from the right and the left, prostrating themselves to Allah, and that in the humblest manner?

ولله يسجد ما في السماوات وما في الأرض من دابة والملائكة وهم لا يستكبرون
And to Allah doth obeisance all that is in the heavens and on earth, whether moving (living) creatures or the angels: for none are arrogant (before their Lord).

يخافون ربهم من فوقهم ويفعلون ما يؤمرون
They all revere their Lord, high above them, and they do all that they are commanded.

وقال الله لا تتخذوا إلهين اثنين إنما هو إله واحد فإياي فارهبون
Allah has said: "Take not (for worship) two gods: for He is just One Allah: then fear Me (and Me alone)."

وله ما في السماوات والأرض وله الدين واصبا أفغير الله تتقون
To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and on earth, and to Him is duty due always: then will ye fear other than Allah?

وما بكم من نعمة فمن الله ثم إذا مسكم الضر فإليه تجأرون
And ye have no good thing but is from Allah: and moreover, when ye are touched by distress, unto Him ye cry with groans;

ثم إذا كشف الضر عنكم إذا فريق منكم بربهم يشركون
Yet, when He removes the distress from you, behold! some of you turn to other gods to join with their Lord-

ليكفروا بما آتيناهم فتمتعوا فسوف تعلمون
(As if) to show their ingratitude for the favours we have bestowed on them! then enjoy (your brief day): but soon will ye know (your folly)!

ويجعلون لما لا يعلمون نصيبا مما رزقناهم تالله لتسألن عما كنتم تفترون
And they (even) assign, to things they do not know, a portion out of that which We have bestowed for their sustenance! By Allah, ye shall certainly be called to account for your false inventions.

ويجعلون لله البنات سبحانه ولهم ما يشتهون
And they assign daughters for Allah! - Glory be to Him! - and for themselves (sons,- the issue) they desire!

وإذا بشر أحدهم بالأنثى ظل وجهه مسودا وهو كظيم
When news is brought to one of them, of (the birth of) a female (child), his face darkens, and he is filled with inward grief!

يتوارى من القوم من سوء ما بشر به أيمسكه على هون أم يدسه في التراب ألا ساء ما يحكمون
With shame does he hide himself from his people, because of the bad news he has had! Shall he retain it on (sufferance and) contempt, or bury it in the dust? Ah! what an evil (choice) they decide on?

للذين لا يؤمنون بالآخرة مثل السوء ولله المثل الأعلى وهو العزيز الحكيم
To those who believe not in the Hereafter, applies the similitude of evil: to Allah applies the highest similitude: for He is the Exalted in Power, full of Wisdom.

ولو يؤاخذ الله الناس بظلمهم ما ترك عليها من دابة ولكن يؤخرهم إلى أجل مسمى فإذا جاء أجلهم لا يستأخرون ساعة ولا يستقدمون
If Allah were to punish men for their wrong-doing, He would not leave, on the (earth), a single living creature: but He gives them respite for a stated Term: When their Term expires, they would not be able to delay (the punishment) for a single hour, just as they would not be able to anticipate it (for a single hour).

ويجعلون لله ما يكرهون وتصف ألسنتهم الكذب أن لهم الحسنى لا جرم أن لهم النار وأنهم مفرطون
They attribute to Allah what they hate (for themselves), and their tongues assert the falsehood that all good things are for themselves: without doubt for them is the Fire, and they will be the first to be hastened on into it!

تالله لقد أرسلنا إلى أمم من قبلك فزين لهم الشيطان أعمالهم فهو وليهم اليوم ولهم عذاب أليم
By Allah, We (also) sent (Our messengers) to Peoples before thee; but Satan made, (to the wicked), their own acts seem alluring: He is also their patron today, but they shall have a most grievous penalty.

وما أنزلنا عليك الكتاب إلا لتبين لهم الذي اختلفوا فيه وهدى ورحمة لقوم يؤمنون
And We sent down the Book to thee for the express purpose, that thou shouldst make clear to them those things in which they differ, and that it should be a guide and a mercy to those who believe.

والله أنزل من السماء ماء فأحيا به الأرض بعد موتها إن في ذلك لآية لقوم يسمعون
And Allah sends down rain from the skies, and gives therewith life to the earth after its death: verily in this is a Sign for those who listen.

وإن لكم في الأنعام لعبرة نسقيكم مما في بطونه من بين فرث ودم لبنا خالصا سائغا للشاربين
And verily in cattle (too) will ye find an instructive sign. From what is within their bodies between excretions and blood, We produce, for your drink, milk, pure and agreeable to those who drink it.

ومن ثمرات النخيل والأعناب تتخذون منه سكرا ورزقا حسنا إن في ذلك لآية لقوم يعقلون
And from the fruit of the date-palm and the vine, ye get out wholesome drink and food: behold, in this also is a sign for those who are wise.

وأوحى ربك إلى النحل أن اتخذي من الجبال بيوتا ومن الشجر ومما يعرشون
And thy Lord taught the Bee to build its cells in hills, on trees, and in (men's) habitations;

ثم كلي من كل الثمرات فاسلكي سبل ربك ذللا يخرج من بطونها شراب مختلف ألوانه فيه شفاء للناس إن في ذلك لآية لقوم يتفكرون
Then to eat of all the produce (of the earth), and find with skill the spacious paths of its Lord: there issues from within their bodies a drink of varying colours, wherein is healing for men: verily in this is a Sign for those who give thought.

والله خلقكم ثم يتوفاكم ومنكم من يرد إلى أرذل العمر لكي لا يعلم بعد علم شيئا إن الله عليم قدير
It is Allah who creates you and takes your souls at death; and of you there are some who are sent back to a feeble age, so that they know nothing after having known (much): for Allah is All-Knowing, All-Powerful.

والله فضل بعضكم على بعض في الرزق فما الذين فضلوا برادي رزقهم على ما ملكت أيمانهم فهم فيه سواء أفبنعمة الله يجحدون
Allah has bestowed His gifts of sustenance more freely on some of you than on others: those more favoured are not going to throw back their gifts to those whom their right hands possess, so as to be equal in that respect. Will they then deny the favours of Allah?

والله جعل لكم من أنفسكم أزواجا وجعل لكم من أزواجكم بنين وحفدة ورزقكم من الطيبات أفبالباطل يؤمنون وبنعمت الله هم يكفرون
And Allah has made for you mates (and companions) of your own nature, and made for you, out of them, sons and daughters and grandchildren, and provided for you sustenance of the best: will they then believe in vain things, and be ungrateful for Allah's favours?-

ويعبدون من دون الله ما لا يملك لهم رزقا من السماوات والأرض شيئا ولا يستطيعون
And worship others than Allah,- such as have no power of providing them, for sustenance, with anything in heavens or earth, and cannot possibly have such power?

فلا تضربوا لله الأمثال إن الله يعلم وأنتم لا تعلمون
Invent not similitudes for Allah: for Allah knoweth, and ye know not.

ضرب الله مثلا عبدا مملوكا لا يقدر على شيء ومن رزقناه منا رزقا حسنا فهو ينفق منه سرا وجهرا هل يستوون الحمد لله بل أكثرهم لا يعلمون
Allah sets forth the Parable (of two men: one) a slave under the dominion of another; He has no power of any sort; and (the other) a man on whom We have bestowed goodly favours from Ourselves, and he spends thereof (freely), privately and publicly: are the two equal? (By no means;) praise be to Allah. But most of them understand not.

وضرب الله مثلا رجلين أحدهما أبكم لا يقدر على شيء وهو كل على مولاه أينما يوجهه لا يأت بخير هل يستوي هو ومن يأمر بالعدل وهو على صراط مستقيم
Allah sets forth (another) Parable of two men: one of them dumb, with no power of any sort; a wearisome burden is he to his master; whichever way be directs him, he brings no good: is such a man equal with one who commands Justice, and is on a Straight Way?

ولله غيب السماوات والأرض وما أمر الساعة إلا كلمح البصر أو هو أقرب إن الله على كل شيء قدير
To Allah belongeth the Mystery of the heavens and the earth. And the Decision of the Hour (of Judgment) is as the twingkling of an eye, or even quicker: for Allah hath power over all things.

والله أخرجكم من بطون أمهاتكم لا تعلمون شيئا وجعل لكم السمع والأبصار والأفئدة لعلكم تشكرون
It is He Who brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers when ye knew nothing; and He gave you hearing and sight and intelligence and affections: that ye may give thanks (to Allah).

ألم يروا إلى الطير مسخرات في جو السماء ما يمسكهن إلا الله إن في ذلك لآيات لقوم يؤمنون
Do they not look at the birds, held poised in the midst of (the air and) the sky? Nothing holds them up but (the power of) Allah. Verily in this are signs for those who believe.

والله جعل لكم من بيوتكم سكنا وجعل لكم من جلود الأنعام بيوتا تستخفونها يوم ظعنكم ويوم إقامتكم ومن أصوافها وأوبارها وأشعارها أثاثا ومتاعا إلى حين
It is Allah Who made your habitations homes of rest and quiet for you; and made for you, out of the skins of animals, (tents for) dwellings, which ye find so light (and handy) when ye travel and when ye stop (in your travels); and out of their wool, and their soft fibres (between wool and hair), and their hair, rich stuff and articles of convenience (to serve you) for a time.

والله جعل لكم مما خلق ظلالا وجعل لكم من الجبال أكنانا وجعل لكم سرابيل تقيكم الحر وسرابيل تقيكم بأسكم كذلك يتم نعمته عليكم لعلكم تسلمون
It is Allah Who made out of the things He created, some things to give you shade; of the hills He made some for your shelter; He made you garments to protect you from heat, and coats of mail to protect you from your (mutual) violence. Thus does He complete His favours on you, that ye may bow to His Will (in Islam).

فإن تولوا فإنما عليك البلاغ المبين
But if they turn away, thy duty is only to preach the clear Message.

يعرفون نعمت الله ثم ينكرونها وأكثرهم الكافرون
They recognise the favours of Allah; then they deny them; and most of them are (creatures) ungrateful.

ويوم نبعث من كل أمة شهيدا ثم لا يؤذن للذين كفروا ولا هم يستعتبون
One Day We shall raise from all Peoples a Witness: then will no excuse be accepted from Unbelievers, nor will they receive any favours.

وإذا رأى الذين ظلموا العذاب فلا يخفف عنهم ولا هم ينظرون
When the wrong-doers (actually) see the Penalty, then will it in no way be mitigated, nor will they then receive respite.

وإذا رأى الذين أشركوا شركاءهم قالوا ربنا هؤلاء شركاؤنا الذين كنا ندعو من دونك فألقوا إليهم القول إنكم لكاذبون
When those who gave partners to Allah will see their "partners", they will say: "Our Lord! these are our 'partners,' those whom we used to invoke besides Thee." But they will throw back their word at them (and say): "Indeed ye are liars!"

وألقوا إلى الله يومئذ السلم وضل عنهم ما كانوا يفترون
That Day shall they (openly) show (their) submission to Allah; and all their inventions shall leave them in the lurch.

الذين كفروا وصدوا عن سبيل الله زدناهم عذابا فوق العذاب بما كانوا يفسدون
Those who reject Allah and hinder (men) from the Path of Allah - for them will We add Penalty to Penalty; for that they used to spread mischief.

ويوم نبعث في كل أمة شهيدا عليهم من أنفسهم وجئنا بك شهيدا على هؤلاء ونزلنا عليك الكتاب تبيانا لكل شيء وهدى ورحمة وبشرى للمسلمين
One day We shall raise from all Peoples a witness against them, from amongst themselves: and We shall bring thee as a witness against these (thy people): and We have sent down to thee the Book explaining all things, a Guide, a Mercy, and Glad Tidings to Muslims.

إن الله يأمر بالعدل والإحسان وإيتاء ذي القربى وينهى عن الفحشاء والمنكر والبغي يعظكم لعلكم تذكرون
Allah commands justice, the doing of good, and liberality to kith and kin, and He forbids all shameful deeds, and injustice and rebellion: He instructs you, that ye may receive admonition.

وأوفوا بعهد الله إذا عاهدتم ولا تنقضوا الأيمان بعد توكيدها وقد جعلتم الله عليكم كفيلا إن الله يعلم ما تفعلون
Fulfil the Covenant of Allah when ye have entered into it, and break not your oaths after ye have confirmed them; indeed ye have made Allah your surety; for Allah knoweth all that ye do.

ولا تكونوا كالتي نقضت غزلها من بعد قوة أنكاثا تتخذون أيمانكم دخلا بينكم أن تكون أمة هي أربى من أمة إنما يبلوكم الله به وليبينن لكم يوم القيامة ما كنتم فيه تختلفون
And be not like a woman who breaks into untwisted strands the yarn which she has spun, after it has become strong. Nor take your oaths to practise deception between yourselves, lest one party should be more numerous than another: for Allah will test you by this; and on the Day of Judgment He will certainly make clear to you (the truth of) that wherein ye disagree.

ولو شاء الله لجعلكم أمة واحدة ولكن يضل من يشاء ويهدي من يشاء ولتسألن عما كنتم تعملون
If Allah so willed, He could make you all one people: But He leaves straying whom He pleases, and He guides whom He pleases: but ye shall certainly be called to account for all your actions.

ولا تتخذوا أيمانكم دخلا بينكم فتزل قدم بعد ثبوتها وتذوقوا السوء بما صددتم عن سبيل الله ولكم عذاب عظيم
And take not your oaths, to practise deception between yourselves, with the result that someone's foot may slip after it was firmly planted, and ye may have to taste the evil (consequences) of having hindered (men) from the Path of Allah, and a Mighty Wrath descend on you.

ولا تشتروا بعهد الله ثمنا قليلا إنما عند الله هو خير لكم إن كنتم تعلمون
Nor sell the covenant of Allah for a miserable price: for with Allah is (a prize) far better for you, if ye only knew.

ما عندكم ينفد وما عند الله باق ولنجزين الذين صبروا أجرهم بأحسن ما كانوا يعملون
What is with you must vanish: what is with Allah will endure. And We will certainly bestow, on those who patiently persevere, their reward according to the best of their actions.

من عمل صالحا من ذكر أو أنثى وهو مؤمن فلنحيينه حياة طيبة ولنجزينهم أجرهم بأحسن ما كانوا يعملون
Whoever works righteousness, man or woman, and has Faith, verily, to him will We give a new Life, a life that is good and pure and We will bestow on such their reward according to the best of their actions.

فإذا قرأت القرآن فاستعذ بالله من الشيطان الرجيم
When thou dost read the Qur'an, seek Allah's protection from Satan the rejected one.

إنه ليس له سلطان على الذين آمنوا وعلى ربهم يتوكلون
No authority has he over those who believe and put their trust in their Lord.

إنما سلطانه على الذين يتولونه والذين هم به مشركون
His authority is over those only, who take him as patron and who join partners with Allah.

وإذا بدلنا آية مكان آية والله أعلم بما ينزل قالوا إنما أنت مفتر بل أكثرهم لا يعلمون
When We substitute one revelation for another,- and Allah knows best what He reveals (in stages),- they say, "Thou art but a forger": but most of them understand not.

قل نزله روح القدس من ربك بالحق ليثبت الذين آمنوا وهدى وبشرى للمسلمين
Say, the Holy Spirit has brought the revelation from thy Lord in Truth, in order to strengthen those who believe, and as a Guide and Glad Tidings to Muslims.

ولقد نعلم أنهم يقولون إنما يعلمه بشر لسان الذي يلحدون إليه أعجمي وهذا لسان عربي مبين
We know indeed that they say, "It is a man that teaches him." The tongue of him they wickedly point to is notably foreign, while this is Arabic, pure and clear.

إن الذين لا يؤمنون بآيات الله لا يهديهم الله ولهم عذاب أليم
Those who believe not in the Signs of Allah,- Allah will not guide them, and theirs will be a grievous Penalty.

إنما يفتري الكذب الذين لا يؤمنون بآيات الله وأولئك هم الكاذبون
It is those who believe not in the Signs of Allah, that forge falsehood: it is they who lie!

من كفر بالله من بعد إيمانه إلا من أكره وقلبه مطمئن بالإيمان ولكن من شرح بالكفر صدرا فعليهم غضب من الله ولهم عذاب عظيم
Any one who, after accepting faith in Allah, utters Unbelief,- except under compulsion, his heart remaining firm in Faith - but such as open their breast to Unbelief, on them is Wrath from Allah, and theirs will be a dreadful Penalty.

ذلك بأنهم استحبوا الحياة الدنيا على الآخرة وأن الله لا يهدي القوم الكافرين
This because they love the life of this world better than the Hereafter: and Allah will not guide those who reject Faith.

أولئك الذين طبع الله على قلوبهم وسمعهم وأبصارهم وأولئك هم الغافلون
Those are they whose hearts, ears, and eyes Allah has sealed up, and they take no heed.

لا جرم أنهم في الآخرة هم الخاسرون
Without doubt, in the Hereafter they will perish.

ثم إن ربك للذين هاجروا من بعد ما فتنوا ثم جاهدوا وصبروا إن ربك من بعدها لغفور رحيم
But verily thy Lord,- to those who leave their homes after trials and persecutions,- and who thereafter strive and fight for the faith and patiently persevere,- Thy Lord, after all this is oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

يوم تأتي كل نفس تجادل عن نفسها وتوفى كل نفس ما عملت وهم لا يظلمون
One Day every soul will come up struggling for itself, and every soul will be recompensed (fully) for all its actions, and none will be unjustly dealt with.

وضرب الله مثلا قرية كانت آمنة مطمئنة يأتيها رزقها رغدا من كل مكان فكفرت بأنعم الله فأذاقها الله لباس الجوع والخوف بما كانوا يصنعون
Allah sets forth a Parable: a city enjoying security and quiet, abundantly supplied with sustenance from every place: Yet was it ungrateful for the favours of Allah: so Allah made it taste of hunger and terror (in extremes) (closing in on it) like a garment (from every side), because of the (evil) which (its people) wrought.

ولقد جاءهم رسول منهم فكذبوه فأخذهم العذاب وهم ظالمون
And there came to them a Messenger from among themselves, but they falsely rejected him; so the Wrath seized them even in the midst of their iniquities.

فكلوا مما رزقكم الله حلالا طيبا واشكروا نعمت الله إن كنتم إياه تعبدون
So eat of the sustenance which Allah has provided for you, lawful and good; and be grateful for the favours of Allah, if it is He Whom ye serve.

إنما حرم عليكم الميتة والدم ولحم الخنزير وما أهل لغير الله به فمن اضطر غير باغ ولا عاد فإن الله غفور رحيم
He has only forbidden you dead meat, and blood, and the flesh of swine, and any (food) over which the name of other than Allah has been invoked. But if one is forced by necessity, without wilful disobedience, nor transgressing due limits,- then Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

ولا تقولوا لما تصف ألسنتكم الكذب هذا حلال وهذا حرام لتفتروا على الله الكذب إن الذين يفترون على الله الكذب لا يفلحون
But say not - for any false thing that your tongues may put forth,- "This is lawful, and this is forbidden," so as to ascribe false things to Allah. For those who ascribe false things to Allah, will never prosper.

متاع قليل ولهم عذاب أليم
(In such falsehood) is but a paltry profit; but they will have a most grievous Penalty.

وعلى الذين هادوا حرمنا ما قصصنا عليك من قبل وما ظلمناهم ولكن كانوا أنفسهم يظلمون
To the Jews We prohibited such things as We have mentioned to thee before: We did them no wrong, but they were used to doing wrong to themselves.

ثم إن ربك للذين عملوا السوء بجهالة ثم تابوا من بعد ذلك وأصلحوا إن ربك من بعدها لغفور رحيم
But verily thy Lord,- to those who do wrong in ignorance, but who thereafter repent and make amends,- thy Lord, after all this, is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

إن إبراهيم كان أمة قانتا لله حنيفا ولم يك من المشركين
Abraham was indeed a model, devoutly obedient to Allah, (and) true in Faith, and he joined not gods with Allah:

شاكرا لأنعمه اجتباه وهداه إلى صراط مستقيم
He showed his gratitude for the favours of Allah, who chose him, and guided him to a Straight Way.

وآتيناه في الدنيا حسنة وإنه في الآخرة لمن الصالحين
And We gave him Good in this world, and he will be, in the Hereafter, in the ranks of the Righteous.

ثم أوحينا إليك أن اتبع ملة إبراهيم حنيفا وما كان من المشركين
So We have taught thee the inspired (Message), "Follow the ways of Abraham the True in Faith, and he joined not gods with Allah."

إنما جعل السبت على الذين اختلفوا فيه وإن ربك ليحكم بينهم يوم القيامة فيما كانوا فيه يختلفون
The Sabbath was only made (strict) for those who disagreed (as to its observance); But Allah will judge between them on the Day of Judgment, as to their differences.

ادع إلى سبيل ربك بالحكمة والموعظة الحسنة وجادلهم بالتي هي أحسن إن ربك هو أعلم بمن ضل عن سبيله وهو أعلم بالمهتدين
Invite (all) to the Way of thy Lord with wisdom and beautiful preaching; and argue with them in ways that are best and most gracious: for thy Lord knoweth best, who have strayed from His Path, and who receive guidance.

وإن عاقبتم فعاقبوا بمثل ما عوقبتم به ولئن صبرتم لهو خير للصابرين
And if ye do catch them out, catch them out no worse than they catch you out: But if ye show patience, that is indeed the best (course) for those who are patient.

واصبر وما صبرك إلا بالله ولا تحزن عليهم ولا تك في ضيق مما يمكرون
And do thou be patient, for thy patience is but from Allah; nor grieve over them: and distress not thyself because of their plots.

إن الله مع الذين اتقوا والذين هم محسنون
For Allah is with those who restrain themselves, and those who do good.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم سبحان الذي أسرى بعبده ليلا من المسجد الحرام إلى المسجد الأقصى الذي باركنا حوله لنريه من آياتنا إنه هو السميع البصير
Glory to (Allah) Who did take His servant for a Journey by night from the Sacred Mosque to the farthest Mosque, whose precincts We did bless,- in order that We might show him some of Our Signs: for He is the One Who heareth and seeth (all things).

وآتينا موسى الكتاب وجعلناه هدى لبني إسرائيل ألا تتخذوا من دوني وكيلا
We gave Moses the Book, and made it a Guide to the Children of Israel, (commanding): "Take not other than Me as Disposer of (your) affairs."

ذرية من حملنا مع نوح إنه كان عبدا شكورا
O ye that are sprung from those whom We carried (in the Ark) with Noah! Verily he was a devotee most grateful.

وقضينا إلى بني إسرائيل في الكتاب لتفسدن في الأرض مرتين ولتعلن علوا كبيرا
And We gave (Clear) Warning to the Children of Israel in the Book, that twice would they do mischief on the earth and be elated with mighty arrogance (and twice would they be punished)!

فإذا جاء وعد أولاهما بعثنا عليكم عبادا لنا أولي بأس شديد فجاسوا خلال الديار وكان وعدا مفعولا
When the first of the warnings came to pass, We sent against you Our servants given to terrible warfare: They entered the very inmost parts of your homes; and it was a warning (completely) fulfilled.

ثم رددنا لكم الكرة عليهم وأمددناكم بأموال وبنين وجعلناكم أكثر نفيرا
Then did We grant you the Return as against them: We gave you increase in resources and sons, and made you the more numerous in man-power.

إن أحسنتم أحسنتم لأنفسكم وإن أسأتم فلها فإذا جاء وعد الآخرة ليسوءوا وجوهكم وليدخلوا المسجد كما دخلوه أول مرة وليتبروا ما علوا تتبيرا
If ye did well, ye did well for yourselves; if ye did evil, (ye did it) against yourselves. So when the second of the warnings came to pass, (We permitted your enemies) to disfigure your faces, and to enter your Temple as they had entered it before, and to visit with destruction all that fell into their power.

عسى ربكم أن يرحمكم وإن عدتم عدنا وجعلنا جهنم للكافرين حصيرا
It may be that your Lord may (yet) show Mercy unto you; but if ye revert (to your sins), We shall revert (to Our punishments): And we have made Hell a prison for those who reject (all Faith).

إن هذا القرآن يهدي للتي هي أقوم ويبشر المؤمنين الذين يعملون الصالحات أن لهم أجرا كبيرا
Verily this Qur'an doth guide to that which is most right (or stable), and giveth the Glad Tidings to the Believers who work deeds of righteousness, that they shall have a magnificent reward;

وأن الذين لا يؤمنون بالآخرة أعتدنا لهم عذابا أليما
And to those who believe not in the Hereafter, (it announceth) that We have prepared for them a Penalty Grievous (indeed).

ويدع الإنسان بالشر دعاءه بالخير وكان الإنسان عجولا
The prayer that man should make for good, he maketh for evil; for man is given to hasty (deeds).

وجعلنا الليل والنهار آيتين فمحونا آية الليل وجعلنا آية النهار مبصرة لتبتغوا فضلا من ربكم ولتعلموا عدد السنين والحساب وكل شيء فصلناه تفصيلا
We have made the Night and the Day as two (of Our) Signs: the Sign of the Night have We obscured, while the Sign of the Day We have made to enlighten you; that ye may seek bounty from your Lord, and that ye may know the number and count of the years: all things have We explained in detail.

وكل إنسان ألزمناه طائره في عنقه ونخرج له يوم القيامة كتابا يلقاه منشورا
Every man's fate We have fastened on his own neck: On the Day of Judgment We shall bring out for him a scroll, which he will see spread open.

اقرأ كتابك كفى بنفسك اليوم عليك حسيبا
(It will be said to him:) "Read thine (own) record: Sufficient is thy soul this day to make out an account against thee."

من اهتدى فإنما يهتدي لنفسه ومن ضل فإنما يضل عليها ولا تزر وازرة وزر أخرى وما كنا معذبين حتى نبعث رسولا
Who receiveth guidance, receiveth it for his own benefit: who goeth astray doth so to his own loss: No bearer of burdens can bear the burden of another: nor would We visit with Our Wrath until We had sent an messenger (to give warning).

وإذا أردنا أن نهلك قرية أمرنا مترفيها ففسقوا فيها فحق عليها القول فدمرناها تدميرا
When We decide to destroy a population, We (first) send a definite order to those among them who are given the good things of this life and yet transgress; so that the word is proved true against them: then (it is) We destroy them utterly.

وكم أهلكنا من القرون من بعد نوح وكفى بربك بذنوب عباده خبيرا بصيرا
How many generations have We destroyed after Noah? and enough is thy Lord to note and see the sins of His servants.

من كان يريد العاجلة عجلنا له فيها ما نشاء لمن نريد ثم جعلنا له جهنم يصلاها مذموما مدحورا
If any do wish for the transitory things (of this life), We readily grant them - such things as We will, to such person as We will: in the end have We provided Hell for them: they will burn therein, disgraced and rejected.

ومن أراد الآخرة وسعى لها سعيها وهو مؤمن فأولئك كان سعيهم مشكورا
Those who do wish for the (things of) the Hereafter, and strive therefor with all due striving, and have Faith,- they are the ones whose striving is acceptable (to Allah).

كلا نمد هؤلاء وهؤلاء من عطاء ربك وما كان عطاء ربك محظورا
Of the bounties of thy Lord We bestow freely on all- These as well as those: The bounties of thy Lord are not closed (to anyone).

انظر كيف فضلنا بعضهم على بعض وللآخرة أكبر درجات وأكبر تفضيلا
See how We have bestowed more on some than on others; but verily the Hereafter is more in rank and gradation and more in excellence.

لا تجعل مع الله إلها آخر فتقعد مذموما مخذولا
Take not with Allah another object of worship; or thou (O man!) wilt sit in disgrace and destitution.

وقضى ربك ألا تعبدوا إلا إياه وبالوالدين إحسانا إما يبلغن عندك الكبر أحدهما أو كلاهما فلا تقل لهما أف ولا تنهرهما وقل لهما قولا كريما
Thy Lord hath decreed that ye worship none but Him, and that ye be kind to parents. Whether one or both of them attain old age in thy life, say not to them a word of contempt, nor repel them, but address them in terms of honour.

واخفض لهما جناح الذل من الرحمة وقل رب ارحمهما كما ربياني صغيرا
And, out of kindness, lower to them the wing of humility, and say: "My Lord! bestow on them thy Mercy even as they cherished me in childhood."

ربكم أعلم بما في نفوسكم إن تكونوا صالحين فإنه كان للأوابين غفورا
Your Lord knoweth best what is in your hearts: If ye do deeds of righteousness, verily He is Most Forgiving to those who turn to Him again and again (in true penitence).

وآت ذا القربى حقه والمسكين وابن السبيل ولا تبذر تبذيرا
And render to the kindred their due rights, as (also) to those in want, and to the wayfarer: But squander not (your wealth) in the manner of a spendthrift.

إن المبذرين كانوا إخوان الشياطين وكان الشيطان لربه كفورا
Verily spendthrifts are brothers of the Evil Ones; and the Evil One is to his Lord (himself) ungrateful.

وإما تعرضن عنهم ابتغاء رحمة من ربك ترجوها فقل لهم قولا ميسورا
And even if thou hast to turn away from them in pursuit of the Mercy from thy Lord which thou dost expect, yet speak to them a word of easy kindness.

ولا تجعل يدك مغلولة إلى عنقك ولا تبسطها كل البسط فتقعد ملوما محسورا
Make not thy hand tied (like a niggard's) to thy neck, nor stretch it forth to its utmost reach, so that thou become blameworthy and destitute.

إن ربك يبسط الرزق لمن يشاء ويقدر إنه كان بعباده خبيرا بصيرا
Verily thy Lord doth provide sustenance in abundance for whom He pleaseth, and He provideth in a just measure. For He doth know and regard all His servants.

ولا تقتلوا أولادكم خشية إملاق نحن نرزقهم وإياكم إن قتلهم كان خطئا كبيرا
Kill not your children for fear of want: We shall provide sustenance for them as well as for you. Verily the killing of them is a great sin.

ولا تقربوا الزنى إنه كان فاحشة وساء سبيلا
Nor come nigh to adultery: for it is a shameful (deed) and an evil, opening the road (to other evils).

ولا تقتلوا النفس التي حرم الله إلا بالحق ومن قتل مظلوما فقد جعلنا لوليه سلطانا فلا يسرف في القتل إنه كان منصورا
Nor take life - which Allah has made sacred - except for just cause. And if anyone is slain wrongfully, we have given his heir authority (to demand qisas or to forgive): but let him not exceed bounds in the matter of taking life; for he is helped (by the Law).

ولا تقربوا مال اليتيم إلا بالتي هي أحسن حتى يبلغ أشده وأوفوا بالعهد إن العهد كان مسئولا
Come not nigh to the orphan's property except to improve it, until he attains the age of full strength; and fulfil (every) engagement, for (every) engagement will be enquired into (on the Day of Reckoning).

وأوفوا الكيل إذا كلتم وزنوا بالقسطاس المستقيم ذلك خير وأحسن تأويلا
Give full measure when ye measure, and weigh with a balance that is straight: that is the most fitting and the most advantageous in the final determination.

ولا تقف ما ليس لك به علم إن السمع والبصر والفؤاد كل أولئك كان عنه مسئولا
And pursue not that of which thou hast no knowledge; for every act of hearing, or of seeing or of (feeling in) the heart will be enquired into (on the Day of Reckoning).

ولا تمش في الأرض مرحا إنك لن تخرق الأرض ولن تبلغ الجبال طولا
Nor walk on the earth with insolence: for thou canst not rend the earth asunder, nor reach the mountains in height.

كل ذلك كان سيئه عند ربك مكروها
Of all such things the evil is hateful in the sight of thy Lord.

ذلك مما أوحى إليك ربك من الحكمة ولا تجعل مع الله إلها آخر فتلقى في جهنم ملوما مدحورا
These are among the (precepts of) wisdom, which thy Lord has revealed to thee. Take not, with Allah, another object of worship, lest thou shouldst be thrown into Hell, blameworthy and rejected.

أفأصفاكم ربكم بالبنين واتخذ من الملائكة إناثا إنكم لتقولون قولا عظيما
Has then your Lord (O Pagans!) preferred for you sons, and taken for Himself daughters among the angels? Truly ye utter a most dreadful saying!

ولقد صرفنا في هذا القرآن ليذكروا وما يزيدهم إلا نفورا
We have explained (things) in various (ways) in this Qur'an, in order that they may receive admonition, but it only increases their flight (from the Truth)!

قل لو كان معه آلهة كما يقولون إذا لابتغوا إلى ذي العرش سبيلا
Say: If there had been (other) gods with Him, as they say,- behold, they would certainly have sought out a way to the Lord of the Throne!

سبحانه وتعالى عما يقولون علوا كبيرا
Glory to Him! He is high above all that they say!- Exalted and Great (beyond measure)!

تسبح له السماوات السبع والأرض ومن فيهن وإن من شيء إلا يسبح بحمده ولكن لا تفقهون تسبيحهم إنه كان حليما غفورا
The seven heavens and the earth, and all beings therein, declare His glory: there is not a thing but celebrates His praise; And yet ye understand not how they declare His glory! Verily He is Oft-Forbear, Most Forgiving!

وإذا قرأت القرآن جعلنا بينك وبين الذين لا يؤمنون بالآخرة حجابا مستورا
When thou dost recite the Qur'an, We put, between thee and those who believe not in the Hereafter, a veil invisible:

وجعلنا على قلوبهم أكنة أن يفقهوه وفي آذانهم وقرا وإذا ذكرت ربك في القرآن وحده ولوا على أدبارهم نفورا
And We put coverings over their hearts (and minds) lest they should understand the Qur'an, and deafness into their ears: when thou dost commemorate thy Lord and Him alone in the Qur'an, they turn on their backs, fleeing (from the Truth).

نحن أعلم بما يستمعون به إذ يستمعون إليك وإذ هم نجوى إذ يقول الظالمون إن تتبعون إلا رجلا مسحورا
We know best why it is they listen, when they listen to thee; and when they meet in private conference, behold, the wicked say, "Ye follow none other than a man bewitched!"

انظر كيف ضربوا لك الأمثال فضلوا فلا يستطيعون سبيلا
See what similes they strike for thee: but they have gone astray, and never can they find a way.

وقالوا أإذا كنا عظاما ورفاتا أإنا لمبعوثون خلقا جديدا
They say: "What! when we are reduced to bones and dust, should we really be raised up (to be) a new creation?"

قل كونوا حجارة أو حديدا
Say: "(Nay!) be ye stones or iron,

أو خلقا مما يكبر في صدوركم فسيقولون من يعيدنا قل الذي فطركم أول مرة فسينغضون إليك رءوسهم ويقولون متى هو قل عسى أن يكون قريبا
"Or created matter which, in your minds, is hardest (to be raised up),- (Yet shall ye be raised up)!" then will they say: "Who will cause us to return?" Say: "He who created you first!" Then will they wag their heads towards thee, and say, "When will that be?" Say, "May be it will be quite soon!

يوم يدعوكم فتستجيبون بحمده وتظنون إن لبثتم إلا قليلا
"It will be on a Day when He will call you, and ye will answer (His call) with (words of) His praise, and ye will think that ye tarried but a little while!"

وقل لعبادي يقولوا التي هي أحسن إن الشيطان ينزغ بينهم إن الشيطان كان للإنسان عدوا مبينا
Say to My servants that they should (only) say those things that are best: for Satan doth sow dissensions among them: For Satan is to man an avowed enemy.

ربكم أعلم بكم إن يشأ يرحمكم أو إن يشأ يعذبكم وما أرسلناك عليهم وكيلا
It is your Lord that knoweth you best: If He please, He granteth you mercy, or if He please, punishment: We have not sent thee to be a disposer of their affairs for them.

وربك أعلم بمن في السماوات والأرض ولقد فضلنا بعض النبيين على بعض وآتينا داوود زبورا
And it is your Lord that knoweth best all beings that are in the heavens and on earth: We did bestow on some prophets more (and other) gifts than on others: and We gave to David (the gift of) the Psalms.

قل ادعوا الذين زعمتم من دونه فلا يملكون كشف الضر عنكم ولا تحويلا
Say: "Call on those - besides Him - whom ye fancy: they have neither the power to remove your troubles from you nor to change them."

أولئك الذين يدعون يبتغون إلى ربهم الوسيلة أيهم أقرب ويرجون رحمته ويخافون عذابه إن عذاب ربك كان محذورا
Those whom they call upon do desire (for themselves) means of access to their Lord, - even those who are nearest: they hope for His Mercy and fear His Wrath: for the Wrath of thy Lord is something to take heed of.

وإن من قرية إلا نحن مهلكوها قبل يوم القيامة أو معذبوها عذابا شديدا كان ذلك في الكتاب مسطورا
There is not a population but We shall destroy it before the Day of Judgment or punish it with a dreadful Penalty: that is written in the (eternal) Record.

وما منعنا أن نرسل بالآيات إلا أن كذب بها الأولون وآتينا ثمود الناقة مبصرة فظلموا بها وما نرسل بالآيات إلا تخويفا
And We refrain from sending the signs, only because the men of former generations treated them as false: We sent the she-camel to the Thamud to open their eyes, but they treated her wrongfully: We only send the Signs by way of terror (and warning from evil).

وإذ قلنا لك إن ربك أحاط بالناس وما جعلنا الرؤيا التي أريناك إلا فتنة للناس والشجرة الملعونة في القرآن ونخوفهم فما يزيدهم إلا طغيانا كبيرا
Behold! We told thee that thy Lord doth encompass mankind round about: We granted the vision which We showed thee, but as a trial for men,- as also the Cursed Tree (mentioned) in the Qur'an: We put terror (and warning) into them, but it only increases their inordinate transgression!

وإذ قلنا للملائكة اسجدوا لآدم فسجدوا إلا إبليس قال أأسجد لمن خلقت طينا
Behold! We said to the angels: "Bow down unto Adam": They bowed down except Iblis: He said, "Shall I bow down to one whom Thou didst create from clay?"

قال أرأيتك هذا الذي كرمت علي لئن أخرتن إلى يوم القيامة لأحتنكن ذريته إلا قليلا
He said: "Seest Thou? this is the one whom Thou hast honoured above me! If Thou wilt but respite me to the Day of Judgment, I will surely bring his descendants under my sway - all but a few!"

قال اذهب فمن تبعك منهم فإن جهنم جزاؤكم جزاء موفورا
(Allah) said: "Go thy way; if any of them follow thee, verily Hell will be the recompense of you (all)- an ample recompense.

واستفزز من استطعت منهم بصوتك وأجلب عليهم بخيلك ورجلك وشاركهم في الأموال والأولاد وعدهم وما يعدهم الشيطان إلا غرورا
"Lead to destruction those whom thou canst among them, with thy (seductive) voice; make assaults on them with thy cavalry and thy infantry; mutually share with them wealth and children; and make promises to them." But Satan promises them nothing but deceit.

إن عبادي ليس لك عليهم سلطان وكفى بربك وكيلا
"As for My servants, no authority shalt thou have over them:" Enough is thy Lord for a Disposer of affairs.

ربكم الذي يزجي لكم الفلك في البحر لتبتغوا من فضله إنه كان بكم رحيما
Your Lord is He That maketh the Ship go smoothly for you through the sea, in order that ye may seek of his Bounty. For he is unto you most Merciful.

وإذا مسكم الضر في البحر ضل من تدعون إلا إياه فلما نجاكم إلى البر أعرضتم وكان الإنسان كفورا
When distress seizes you at sea, those that ye call upon - besides Himself - leave you in the lurch! but when He brings you back safe to land, ye turn away (from Him). Most ungrateful is man!

أفأمنتم أن يخسف بكم جانب البر أو يرسل عليكم حاصبا ثم لا تجدوا لكم وكيلا
Do ye then feel secure that He will not cause you to be swallowed up beneath the earth when ye are on land, or that He will not send against you a violent tornado (with showers of stones) so that ye shall find no one to carry out your affairs for you?

أم أمنتم أن يعيدكم فيه تارة أخرى فيرسل عليكم قاصفا من الريح فيغرقكم بما كفرتم ثم لا تجدوا لكم علينا به تبيعا
Or do ye feel secure that He will not send you back a second time to sea and send against you a heavy gale to drown you because of your ingratitude, so that ye find no helper. Therein against Us?

ولقد كرمنا بني آدم وحملناهم في البر والبحر ورزقناهم من الطيبات وفضلناهم على كثير ممن خلقنا تفضيلا
We have honoured the sons of Adam; provided them with transport on land and sea; given them for sustenance things good and pure; and conferred on them special favours, above a great part of our creation.

يوم ندعو كل أناس بإمامهم فمن أوتي كتابه بيمينه فأولئك يقرءون كتابهم ولا يظلمون فتيلا
One day We shall call together all human beings with their (respective) Imams: those who are given their record in their right hand will read it (with pleasure), and they will not be dealt with unjustly in the least.

ومن كان في هذه أعمى فهو في الآخرة أعمى وأضل سبيلا
But those who were blind in this world, will be blind in the hereafter, and most astray from the Path.

وإن كادوا ليفتنونك عن الذي أوحينا إليك لتفتري علينا غيره وإذا لاتخذوك خليلا
And their purpose was to tempt thee away from that which We had revealed unto thee, to substitute in our name something quite different; (in that case), behold! they would certainly have made thee (their) friend!

ولولا أن ثبتناك لقد كدت تركن إليهم شيئا قليلا
And had We not given thee strength, thou wouldst nearly have inclined to them a little.

إذا لأذقناك ضعف الحياة وضعف الممات ثم لا تجد لك علينا نصيرا
In that case We should have made thee taste an equal portion (of punishment) in this life, and an equal portion in death: and moreover thou wouldst have found none to help thee against Us!

وإن كادوا ليستفزونك من الأرض ليخرجوك منها وإذا لا يلبثون خلافك إلا قليلا
Their purpose was to scare thee off the land, in order to expel thee; but in that case they would not have stayed (therein) after thee, except for a little while.

سنة من قد أرسلنا قبلك من رسلنا ولا تجد لسنتنا تحويلا
(This was Our) way with the messengers We sent before thee: thou wilt find no change in Our ways.

أقم الصلاة لدلوك الشمس إلى غسق الليل وقرآن الفجر إن قرآن الفجر كان مشهودا
Establish regular prayers - at the sun's decline till the darkness of the night, and the morning prayer and reading: for the prayer and reading in the morning carry their testimony.

ومن الليل فتهجد به نافلة لك عسى أن يبعثك ربك مقاما محمودا
And pray in the small watches of the morning: (it would be) an additional prayer (or spiritual profit) for thee: soon will thy Lord raise thee to a Station of Praise and Glory!

وقل رب أدخلني مدخل صدق وأخرجني مخرج صدق واجعل لي من لدنك سلطانا نصيرا
Say: "O my Lord! Let my entry be by the Gate of Truth and Honour, and likewise my exit by the Gate of Truth and Honour; and grant me from Thy Presence an authority to aid (me)."

وقل جاء الحق وزهق الباطل إن الباطل كان زهوقا
And say: "Truth has (now) arrived, and Falsehood perished: for Falsehood is (by its nature) bound to perish."

وننزل من القرآن ما هو شفاء ورحمة للمؤمنين ولا يزيد الظالمين إلا خسارا
We send down (stage by stage) in the Qur'an that which is a healing and a mercy to those who believe: to the unjust it causes nothing but loss after loss.

وإذا أنعمنا على الإنسان أعرض ونأى بجانبه وإذا مسه الشر كان يئوسا
Yet when We bestow Our favours on man, he turns away and becomes remote on his side (instead of coming to Us), and when evil seizes him he gives himself up to despair!

قل كل يعمل على شاكلته فربكم أعلم بمن هو أهدى سبيلا
Say: "Everyone acts according to his own disposition: But your Lord knows best who it is that is best guided on the Way."

ويسألونك عن الروح قل الروح من أمر ربي وما أوتيتم من العلم إلا قليلا
They ask thee concerning the Spirit (of inspiration). Say: "The Spirit (cometh) by command of my Lord: of knowledge it is only a little that is communicated to you, (O men!)"

ولئن شئنا لنذهبن بالذي أوحينا إليك ثم لا تجد لك به علينا وكيلا
If it were Our Will, We could take away that which We have sent thee by inspiration: then wouldst thou find none to plead thy affair in that matter as against Us,-

إلا رحمة من ربك إن فضله كان عليك كبيرا
Except for Mercy from thy Lord: for his bounty is to thee (indeed) great.

قل لئن اجتمعت الإنس والجن على أن يأتوا بمثل هذا القرآن لا يأتون بمثله ولو كان بعضهم لبعض ظهيرا
Say: "If the whole of mankind and Jinns were to gather together to produce the like of this Qur'an, they could not produce the like thereof, even if they backed up each other with help and support.

ولقد صرفنا للناس في هذا القرآن من كل مثل فأبى أكثر الناس إلا كفورا
And We have explained to man, in this Qur'an, every kind of similitude: yet the greater part of men refuse (to receive it) except with ingratitude!

وقالوا لن نؤمن لك حتى تفجر لنا من الأرض ينبوعا
They say: "We shall not believe in thee, until thou cause a spring to gush forth for us from the earth,

أو تكون لك جنة من نخيل وعنب فتفجر الأنهار خلالها تفجيرا
"Or (until) thou have a garden of date trees and vines, and cause rivers to gush forth in their midst, carrying abundant water;

أو تسقط السماء كما زعمت علينا كسفا أو تأتي بالله والملائكة قبيلا
"Or thou cause the sky to fall in pieces, as thou sayest (will happen), against us; or thou bring Allah and the angels before (us) face to face:

أو يكون لك بيت من زخرف أو ترقى في السماء ولن نؤمن لرقيك حتى تنزل علينا كتابا نقرؤه قل سبحان ربي هل كنت إلا بشرا رسولا
"Or thou have a house adorned with gold, or thou mount a ladder right into the skies. No, we shall not even believe in thy mounting until thou send down to us a book that we could read." Say: "Glory to my Lord! Am I aught but a man,- a messenger?"

وما منع الناس أن يؤمنوا إذ جاءهم الهدى إلا أن قالوا أبعث الله بشرا رسولا
What kept men back from belief when Guidance came to them, was nothing but this: they said, "Has Allah sent a man (like us) to be (His) Messenger?"

قل لو كان في الأرض ملائكة يمشون مطمئنين لنزلنا عليهم من السماء ملكا رسولا
Say, "If there were settled, on earth, angels walking about in peace and quiet, We should certainly have sent them down from the heavens an angel for a messenger."

قل كفى بالله شهيدا بيني وبينكم إنه كان بعباده خبيرا بصيرا
Say: "Enough is Allah for a witness between me and you: for He is well acquainted with His servants, and He sees (all things).

ومن يهد الله فهو المهتد ومن يضلل فلن تجد لهم أولياء من دونه ونحشرهم يوم القيامة على وجوههم عميا وبكما وصما مأواهم جهنم كلما خبت زدناهم سعيرا
It is he whom Allah guides, that is on true Guidance; but he whom He leaves astray - for such wilt thou find no protector besides Him. On the Day of Judgment We shall gather, them together, prone on their faces, blind, dumb, and deaf: their abode will be Hell: every time it shows abatement, We shall increase from them the fierceness of the Fire.

ذلك جزاؤهم بأنهم كفروا بآياتنا وقالوا أإذا كنا عظاما ورفاتا أإنا لمبعوثون خلقا جديدا
That is their recompense, because they rejected Our signs, and said, "When we are reduced to bones and broken dust, should we really be raised up (to be) a new Creation?"

أولم يروا أن الله الذي خلق السماوات والأرض قادر على أن يخلق مثلهم وجعل لهم أجلا لا ريب فيه فأبى الظالمون إلا كفورا
See they not that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, has power to create the like of them (anew)? Only He has decreed a term appointed, of which there is no doubt. But the unjust refuse (to receive it) except with ingratitude.

قل لو أنتم تملكون خزائن رحمة ربي إذا لأمسكتم خشية الإنفاق وكان الإنسان قتورا
Say: "If ye had control of the Treasures of the Mercy of my Lord, behold, ye would keep them back, for fear of spending them: for man is (every) niggardly!"

ولقد آتينا موسى تسع آيات بينات فاسأل بني إسرائيل إذ جاءهم فقال له فرعون إني لأظنك يا موسى مسحورا
To Moses We did give Nine Clear Signs: As the Children of Israel: when he came to them, Pharaoh said to him: "O Moses! I consider thee, indeed, to have been worked upon by sorcery!

قال لقد علمت ما أنزل هؤلاء إلا رب السماوات والأرض بصائر وإني لأظنك يا فرعون مثبورا
Moses said, "Thou knowest well that these things have been sent down by none but the Lord of the heavens and the earth as eye-opening evidence: and I consider thee indeed, O Pharaoh, to be one doomed to destruction!"

فأراد أن يستفزهم من الأرض فأغرقناه ومن معه جميعا
So he resolved to remove them from the face of the earth: but We did drown him and all who were with him.

وقلنا من بعده لبني إسرائيل اسكنوا الأرض فإذا جاء وعد الآخرة جئنا بكم لفيفا
And We said thereafter to the Children of Israel, "Dwell securely in the land (of promise)": but when the second of the warnings came to pass, We gathered you together in a mingled crowd.

وبالحق أنزلناه وبالحق نزل وما أرسلناك إلا مبشرا ونذيرا
We sent down the (Qur'an) in Truth, and in Truth has it descended: and We sent thee but to give Glad Tidings and to warn (sinners).

وقرآنا فرقناه لتقرأه على الناس على مكث ونزلناه تنزيلا
(It is) a Qur'an which We have divided (into parts from time to time), in order that thou mightest recite it to men at intervals: We have revealed it by stages.

قل آمنوا به أو لا تؤمنوا إن الذين أوتوا العلم من قبله إذا يتلى عليهم يخرون للأذقان سجدا
Say: "Whether ye believe in it or not, it is true that those who were given knowledge beforehand, when it is recited to them, fall down on their faces in humble prostration,

ويقولون سبحان ربنا إن كان وعد ربنا لمفعولا
"And they say: 'Glory to our Lord! Truly has the promise of our Lord been fulfilled!'"

ويخرون للأذقان يبكون ويزيدهم خشوعا
They fall down on their faces in tears, and it increases their (earnest) humility.

قل ادعوا الله أو ادعوا الرحمن أيا ما تدعوا فله الأسماء الحسنى ولا تجهر بصلاتك ولا تخافت بها وابتغ بين ذلك سبيلا
Say: "Call upon Allah, or call upon Rahman: by whatever name ye call upon Him, (it is well): for to Him belong the Most Beautiful Names. Neither speak thy Prayer aloud, nor speak it in a low tone, but seek a middle course between."

وقل الحمد لله الذي لم يتخذ ولدا ولم يكن له شريك في الملك ولم يكن له ولي من الذل وكبره تكبيرا
Say: "Praise be to Allah, who begets no son, and has no partner in (His) dominion: Nor (needs) He any to protect Him from humiliation: yea, magnify Him for His greatness and glory!"

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الحمد لله الذي أنزل على عبده الكتاب ولم يجعل له عوجا
Praise be to Allah, Who hath sent to His Servant the Book, and hath allowed therein no Crookedness:

قيما لينذر بأسا شديدا من لدنه ويبشر المؤمنين الذين يعملون الصالحات أن لهم أجرا حسنا
(He hath made it) Straight (and Clear) in order that He may warn (the godless) of a terrible Punishment from Him, and that He may give Glad Tidings to the Believers who work righteous deeds, that they shall have a goodly Reward,

ماكثين فيه أبدا
Wherein they shall remain for ever:

وينذر الذين قالوا اتخذ الله ولدا
Further, that He may warn those (also) who say, "Allah hath begotten a son":

ما لهم به من علم ولا لآبائهم كبرت كلمة تخرج من أفواههم إن يقولون إلا كذبا
No knowledge have they of such a thing, nor had their fathers. It is a grievous thing that issues from their mouths as a saying what they say is nothing but falsehood!

فلعلك باخع نفسك على آثارهم إن لم يؤمنوا بهذا الحديث أسفا
Thou wouldst only, perchance, fret thyself to death, following after them, in grief, if they believe not in this Message.

إنا جعلنا ما على الأرض زينة لها لنبلوهم أيهم أحسن عملا
That which is on earth we have made but as a glittering show for the earth, in order that We may test them - as to which of them are best in conduct.

وإنا لجاعلون ما عليها صعيدا جرزا
Verily what is on earth we shall make but as dust and dry soil (without growth or herbage).

أم حسبت أن أصحاب الكهف والرقيم كانوا من آياتنا عجبا
Or dost thou reflect that the Companions of the Cave and of the Inscription were wonders among Our Sign?

إذ أوى الفتية إلى الكهف فقالوا ربنا آتنا من لدنك رحمة وهيئ لنا من أمرنا رشدا
Behold, the youths betook themselves to the Cave: they said, "Our Lord! bestow on us Mercy from Thyself, and dispose of our affair for us in the right way!"

فضربنا على آذانهم في الكهف سنين عددا
Then We draw (a veil) over their ears, for a number of years, in the Cave, (so that they heard not):

ثم بعثناهم لنعلم أي الحزبين أحصى لما لبثوا أمدا
Then We roused them, in order to test which of the two parties was best at calculating the term of years they had tarried!

نحن نقص عليك نبأهم بالحق إنهم فتية آمنوا بربهم وزدناهم هدى
We relate to thee their story in truth: they were youths who believed in their Lord, and We advanced them in guidance:

وربطنا على قلوبهم إذ قاموا فقالوا ربنا رب السماوات والأرض لن ندعو من دونه إلها لقد قلنا إذا شططا
We gave strength to their hearts: Behold, they stood up and said: "Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and of the earth: never shall we call upon any god other than Him: if we did, we should indeed have uttered an enormity!

هؤلاء قومنا اتخذوا من دونه آلهة لولا يأتون عليهم بسلطان بين فمن أظلم ممن افترى على الله كذبا
"These our people have taken for worship gods other than Him: why do they not bring forward an authority clear (and convincing) for what they do? Who doth more wrong than such as invent a falsehood against Allah?

وإذ اعتزلتموهم وما يعبدون إلا الله فأووا إلى الكهف ينشر لكم ربكم من رحمته ويهيئ لكم من أمركم مرفقا
"When ye turn away from them and the things they worship other than Allah, betake yourselves to the Cave: Your Lord will shower His mercies on you and disposes of your affair towards comfort and ease."

وترى الشمس إذا طلعت تزاور عن كهفهم ذات اليمين وإذا غربت تقرضهم ذات الشمال وهم في فجوة منه ذلك من آيات الله من يهد الله فهو المهتد ومن يضلل فلن تجد له وليا مرشدا
Thou wouldst have seen the sun, when it rose, declining to the right from their Cave, and when it set, turning away from them to the left, while they lay in the open space in the midst of the Cave. Such are among the Signs of Allah: He whom Allah, guides is rightly guided; but he whom Allah leaves to stray,- for him wilt thou find no protector to lead him to the Right Way.

وتحسبهم أيقاظا وهم رقود ونقلبهم ذات اليمين وذات الشمال وكلبهم باسط ذراعيه بالوصيد لو اطلعت عليهم لوليت منهم فرارا ولملئت منهم رعبا
Thou wouldst have deemed them awake, whilst they were asleep, and We turned them on their right and on their left sides: their dog stretching forth his two fore-legs on the threshold: if thou hadst come up on to them, thou wouldst have certainly turned back from them in flight, and wouldst certainly have been filled with terror of them.

وكذلك بعثناهم ليتساءلوا بينهم قال قائل منهم كم لبثتم قالوا لبثنا يوما أو بعض يوم قالوا ربكم أعلم بما لبثتم فابعثوا أحدكم بورقكم هذه إلى المدينة فلينظر أيها أزكى طعاما فليأتكم برزق منه وليتلطف ولا يشعرن بكم أحدا
Such (being their state), we raised them up (from sleep), that they might question each other. Said one of them, "How long have ye stayed (here)?" They said, "We have stayed (perhaps) a day, or part of a day." (At length) they (all) said, "Allah (alone) knows best how long ye have stayed here.... Now send ye then one of you with this money of yours to the town: let him find out which is the best food (to be had) and bring some to you, that (ye may) satisfy your hunger therewith: And let him behave with care and courtesy, and let him not inform any one about you.

إنهم إن يظهروا عليكم يرجموكم أو يعيدوكم في ملتهم ولن تفلحوا إذا أبدا
"For if they should come upon you, they would stone you or force you to return to their cult, and in that case ye would never attain prosperity."

وكذلك أعثرنا عليهم ليعلموا أن وعد الله حق وأن الساعة لا ريب فيها إذ يتنازعون بينهم أمرهم فقالوا ابنوا عليهم بنيانا ربهم أعلم بهم قال الذين غلبوا على أمرهم لنتخذن عليهم مسجدا
Thus did We make their case known to the people, that they might know that the promise of Allah is true, and that there can be no doubt about the Hour of Judgment. Behold, they dispute among themselves as to their affair. (Some) said, "Construct a building over them": Their Lord knows best about them: those who prevailed over their affair said, "Let us surely build a place of worship over them."

سيقولون ثلاثة رابعهم كلبهم ويقولون خمسة سادسهم كلبهم رجما بالغيب ويقولون سبعة وثامنهم كلبهم قل ربي أعلم بعدتهم ما يعلمهم إلا قليل فلا تمار فيهم إلا مراء ظاهرا ولا تستفت فيهم منهم أحدا
(Some) say they were three, the dog being the fourth among them; (others) say they were five, the dog being the sixth,- doubtfully guessing at the unknown; (yet others) say they were seven, the dog being the eighth. Say thou: "My Lord knoweth best their number; It is but few that know their (real case)." Enter not, therefore, into controversies concerning them, except on a matter that is clear, nor consult any of them about (the affair of) the Sleepers.

ولا تقولن لشيء إني فاعل ذلك غدا
Nor say of anything, "I shall be sure to do so and so tomorrow"-

إلا أن يشاء الله واذكر ربك إذا نسيت وقل عسى أن يهدين ربي لأقرب من هذا رشدا
Without adding, "So please Allah!" and call thy Lord to mind when thou forgettest, and say, "I hope that my Lord will guide me ever closer (even) than this to the right road."

ولبثوا في كهفهم ثلاث مائة سنين وازدادوا تسعا
So they stayed in their Cave three hundred years, and (some) add nine (more)

قل الله أعلم بما لبثوا له غيب السماوات والأرض أبصر به وأسمع ما لهم من دونه من ولي ولا يشرك في حكمه أحدا
Say: "Allah knows best how long they stayed: with Him is (the knowledge of) the secrets of the heavens and the earth: how clearly He sees, how finely He hears (everything)! They have no protector other than Him; nor does He share His Command with any person whatsoever.

واتل ما أوحي إليك من كتاب ربك لا مبدل لكلماته ولن تجد من دونه ملتحدا
And recite (and teach) what has been revealed to thee of the Book of thy Lord: none can change His Words, and none wilt thou find as a refuge other than Him.

واصبر نفسك مع الذين يدعون ربهم بالغداة والعشي يريدون وجهه ولا تعد عيناك عنهم تريد زينة الحياة الدنيا ولا تطع من أغفلنا قلبه عن ذكرنا واتبع هواه وكان أمره فرطا
And keep thy soul content with those who call on their Lord morning and evening, seeking His Face; and let not thine eyes pass beyond them, seeking the pomp and glitter of this Life; no obey any whose heart We have permitted to neglect the remembrance of Us, one who follows his own desires, whose case has gone beyond all bounds.

وقل الحق من ربكم فمن شاء فليؤمن ومن شاء فليكفر إنا أعتدنا للظالمين نارا أحاط بهم سرادقها وإن يستغيثوا يغاثوا بماء كالمهل يشوي الوجوه بئس الشراب وساءت مرتفقا
Say, "The truth is from your Lord": Let him who will believe, and let him who will, reject (it): for the wrong-doers We have prepared a Fire whose (smoke and flames), like the walls and roof of a tent, will hem them in: if they implore relief they will be granted water like melted brass, that will scald their faces, how dreadful the drink! How uncomfortable a couch to recline on!

إن الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات إنا لا نضيع أجر من أحسن عملا
As to those who believe and work righteousness, verily We shall not suffer to perish the reward of any who do a (single) righteous deed.

أولئك لهم جنات عدن تجري من تحتهم الأنهار يحلون فيها من أساور من ذهب ويلبسون ثيابا خضرا من سندس وإستبرق متكئين فيها على الأرائك نعم الثواب وحسنت مرتفقا
For them will be Gardens of Eternity; beneath them rivers will flow; they will be adorned therein with bracelets of gold, and they will wear green garments of fine silk and heavy brocade: They will recline therein on raised thrones. How good the recompense! How beautiful a couch to recline on!

واضرب لهم مثلا رجلين جعلنا لأحدهما جنتين من أعناب وحففناهما بنخل وجعلنا بينهما زرعا
Set forth to them the parable of two men: for one of them We provided two gardens of grape-vines and surrounded them with date palms; in between the two We placed corn-fields.

كلتا الجنتين آتت أكلها ولم تظلم منه شيئا وفجرنا خلالهما نهرا
Each of those gardens brought forth its produce, and failed not in the least therein: in the midst of them We caused a river to flow.

وكان له ثمر فقال لصاحبه وهو يحاوره أنا أكثر منك مالا وأعز نفرا
(Abundant) was the produce this man had: he said to his companion, in the course of a mutual argument: "more wealth have I than you, and more honour and power in (my following of) men."

ودخل جنته وهو ظالم لنفسه قال ما أظن أن تبيد هذه أبدا
He went into his garden in a state (of mind) unjust to his soul: He said, "I deem not that this will ever perish,

وما أظن الساعة قائمة ولئن رددت إلى ربي لأجدن خيرا منها منقلبا
"Nor do I deem that the Hour (of Judgment) will (ever) come: Even if I am brought back to my Lord, I shall surely find (there) something better in exchange."

قال له صاحبه وهو يحاوره أكفرت بالذي خلقك من تراب ثم من نطفة ثم سواك رجلا
His companion said to him, in the course of the argument with him: "Dost thou deny Him Who created thee out of dust, then out of a sperm-drop, then fashioned thee into a man?

لكنا هو الله ربي ولا أشرك بربي أحدا
"But (I think) for my part that He is Allah, My Lord, and none shall I associate with my Lord.

ولولا إذ دخلت جنتك قلت ما شاء الله لا قوة إلا بالله إن ترن أنا أقل منك مالا وولدا
"Why didst thou not, as thou wentest into thy garden, say: 'Allah's will (be done)! There is no power but with Allah!' If thou dost see me less than thee in wealth and sons,

فعسى ربي أن يؤتين خيرا من جنتك ويرسل عليها حسبانا من السماء فتصبح صعيدا زلقا
"It may be that my Lord will give me something better than thy garden, and that He will send on thy garden thunderbolts (by way of reckoning) from heaven, making it (but) slippery sand!-

أو يصبح ماؤها غورا فلن تستطيع له طلبا
"Or the water of the garden will run off underground so that thou wilt never be able to find it."

وأحيط بثمره فأصبح يقلب كفيه على ما أنفق فيها وهي خاوية على عروشها ويقول يا ليتني لم أشرك بربي أحدا
So his fruits (and enjoyment) were encompassed (with ruin), and he remained twisting and turning his hands over what he had spent on his property, which had (now) tumbled to pieces to its very foundations, and he could only say, "Woe is me! Would I had never ascribed partners to my Lord and Cherisher!"

ولم تكن له فئة ينصرونه من دون الله وما كان منتصرا
Nor had he numbers to help him against Allah, nor was he able to deliver himself.

هنالك الولاية لله الحق هو خير ثوابا وخير عقبا
There, the (only) protection comes from Allah, the True One. He is the Best to reward, and the Best to give success.

واضرب لهم مثل الحياة الدنيا كماء أنزلناه من السماء فاختلط به نبات الأرض فأصبح هشيما تذروه الرياح وكان الله على كل شيء مقتدرا
Set forth to them the similitude of the life of this world: It is like the rain which we send down from the skies: the earth's vegetation absorbs it, but soon it becomes dry stubble, which the winds do scatter: it is (only) Allah who prevails over all things.

المال والبنون زينة الحياة الدنيا والباقيات الصالحات خير عند ربك ثوابا وخير أملا
Wealth and sons are allurements of the life of this world: But the things that endure, good deeds, are best in the sight of thy Lord, as rewards, and best as (the foundation for) hopes.

ويوم نسير الجبال وترى الأرض بارزة وحشرناهم فلم نغادر منهم أحدا
One Day We shall remove the mountains, and thou wilt see the earth as a level stretch, and We shall gather them, all together, nor shall We leave out any one of them.

وعرضوا على ربك صفا لقد جئتمونا كما خلقناكم أول مرة بل زعمتم ألن نجعل لكم موعدا
And they will be marshalled before thy Lord in ranks, (with the announcement), "Now have ye come to Us (bare) as We created you first: aye, ye thought We shall not fulfil the appointment made to you to meet (Us)!":

ووضع الكتاب فترى المجرمين مشفقين مما فيه ويقولون يا ويلتنا مال هذا الكتاب لا يغادر صغيرة ولا كبيرة إلا أحصاها ووجدوا ما عملوا حاضرا ولا يظلم ربك أحدا
And the Book (of Deeds) will be placed (before you); and thou wilt see the sinful in great terror because of what is (recorded) therein; they will say, "Ah! woe to us! what a Book is this! It leaves out nothing small or great, but takes account thereof!" They will find all that they did, placed before them: And not one will thy Lord treat with injustice.

وإذ قلنا للملائكة اسجدوا لآدم فسجدوا إلا إبليس كان من الجن ففسق عن أمر ربه أفتتخذونه وذريته أولياء من دوني وهم لكم عدو بئس للظالمين بدلا
Behold! We said to the angels, "Bow down to Adam": They bowed down except Iblis. He was one of the Jinns, and he broke the Command of his Lord. Will ye then take him and his progeny as protectors rather than Me? And they are enemies to you! Evil would be the exchange for the wrong-doers!

ما أشهدتهم خلق السماوات والأرض ولا خلق أنفسهم وما كنت متخذ المضلين عضدا
I called them not to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor (even) their own creation: nor is it for helpers such as Me to take as lead (men) astray!

ويوم يقول نادوا شركائي الذين زعمتم فدعوهم فلم يستجيبوا لهم وجعلنا بينهم موبقا
One Day He will say, "Call on those whom ye thought to be My partners," and they will call on them, but they will not listen to them; and We shall make for them a place of common perdition.

ورأى المجرمون النار فظنوا أنهم مواقعوها ولم يجدوا عنها مصرفا
And the Sinful shall see the fire and apprehend that they have to fall therein: no means will they find to turn away therefrom.

ولقد صرفنا في هذا القرآن للناس من كل مثل وكان الإنسان أكثر شيء جدلا
We have explained in detail in this Qur'an, for the benefit of mankind, every kind of similitude: but man is, in most things, contentious.

وما منع الناس أن يؤمنوا إذ جاءهم الهدى ويستغفروا ربهم إلا أن تأتيهم سنة الأولين أو يأتيهم العذاب قبلا
And what is there to keep back men from believing, now that Guidance has come to them, nor from praying for forgiveness from their Lord, but that (they ask that) the ways of the ancients be repeated with them, or the Wrath be brought to them face to face?

وما نرسل المرسلين إلا مبشرين ومنذرين ويجادل الذين كفروا بالباطل ليدحضوا به الحق واتخذوا آياتي وما أنذروا هزوا
We only send the messengers to give Glad Tidings and to give warnings: But the unbelievers dispute with vain argument, in order therewith to weaken the truth, and they treat My Signs as a jest, as also the fact that they are warned!

ومن أظلم ممن ذكر بآيات ربه فأعرض عنها ونسي ما قدمت يداه إنا جعلنا على قلوبهم أكنة أن يفقهوه وفي آذانهم وقرا وإن تدعهم إلى الهدى فلن يهتدوا إذا أبدا
And who doth more wrong than one who is reminded of the Signs of his Lord, but turns away from them, forgetting the (deeds) which his hands have sent forth? Verily We have set veils over their hearts lest they should understand this, and over their ears, deafness, if thou callest them to guidance, even then will they never accept guidance.

وربك الغفور ذو الرحمة لو يؤاخذهم بما كسبوا لعجل لهم العذاب بل لهم موعد لن يجدوا من دونه موئلا
But your Lord is Most forgiving, full of Mercy. If He were to call them (at once) to account for what they have earned, then surely He would have hastened their punishment: but they have their appointed time, beyond which they will find no refuge.

وتلك القرى أهلكناهم لما ظلموا وجعلنا لمهلكهم موعدا
Such were the populations we destroyed when they committed iniquities; but we fixed an appointed time for their destruction.

وإذ قال موسى لفتاه لا أبرح حتى أبلغ مجمع البحرين أو أمضي حقبا
Behold, Moses said to his attendant, "I will not give up until I reach the junction of the two seas or (until) I spend years and years in travel."

فلما بلغا مجمع بينهما نسيا حوتهما فاتخذ سبيله في البحر سربا
But when they reached the Junction, they forgot (about) their Fish, which took its course through the sea (straight) as in a tunnel.

فلما جاوزا قال لفتاه آتنا غداءنا لقد لقينا من سفرنا هذا نصبا
When they had passed on (some distance), Moses said to his attendant: "Bring us our early meal; truly we have suffered much fatigue at this (stage of) our journey."

قال أرأيت إذ أوينا إلى الصخرة فإني نسيت الحوت وما أنسانيه إلا الشيطان أن أذكره واتخذ سبيله في البحر عجبا
He replied: "Sawest thou (what happened) when we betook ourselves to the rock? I did indeed forget (about) the Fish: none but Satan made me forget to tell (you) about it: it took its course through the sea in a marvellous way!"

قال ذلك ما كنا نبغ فارتدا على آثارهما قصصا
Moses said: "That was what we were seeking after:" So they went back on their footsteps, following (the path they had come).

فوجدا عبدا من عبادنا آتيناه رحمة من عندنا وعلمناه من لدنا علما
So they found one of Our servants, on whom We had bestowed Mercy from Ourselves and whom We had taught knowledge from Our own Presence.

قال له موسى هل أتبعك على أن تعلمن مما علمت رشدا
Moses said to him: "May I follow thee, on the footing that thou teach me something of the (Higher) Truth which thou hast been taught?"

قال إنك لن تستطيع معي صبرا
(The other) said: "Verily thou wilt not be able to have patience with me!"

وكيف تصبر على ما لم تحط به خبرا
"And how canst thou have patience about things about which thy understanding is not complete?"

قال ستجدني إن شاء الله صابرا ولا أعصي لك أمرا
Moses said: "Thou wilt find me, if Allah so will, (truly) patient: nor shall I disobey thee in aught."

قال فإن اتبعتني فلا تسألني عن شيء حتى أحدث لك منه ذكرا
The other said: "If then thou wouldst follow me, ask me no questions about anything until I myself speak to thee concerning it."

فانطلقا حتى إذا ركبا في السفينة خرقها قال أخرقتها لتغرق أهلها لقد جئت شيئا إمرا
So they both proceeded: until, when they were in the boat, he scuttled it. Said Moses: "Hast thou scuttled it in order to drown those in it? Truly a strange thing hast thou done!"

قال ألم أقل إنك لن تستطيع معي صبرا
He answered: "Did I not tell thee that thou canst have no patience with me?"

قال لا تؤاخذني بما نسيت ولا ترهقني من أمري عسرا
Moses said: "Rebuke me not for forgetting, nor grieve me by raising difficulties in my case."

فانطلقا حتى إذا لقيا غلاما فقتله قال أقتلت نفسا زكية بغير نفس لقد جئت شيئا نكرا
Then they proceeded: until, when they met a young man, he slew him. Moses said: "Hast thou slain an innocent person who had slain none? Truly a foul (unheard of) thing hast thou done!"

قال ألم أقل لك إنك لن تستطيع معي صبرا
He answered: "Did I not tell thee that thou canst have no patience with me?"

قال إن سألتك عن شيء بعدها فلا تصاحبني قد بلغت من لدني عذرا
(Moses) said: "If ever I ask thee about anything after this, keep me not in thy company: then wouldst thou have received (full) excuse from my side."

فانطلقا حتى إذا أتيا أهل قرية استطعما أهلها فأبوا أن يضيفوهما فوجدا فيها جدارا يريد أن ينقض فأقامه قال لو شئت لاتخذت عليه أجرا
Then they proceeded: until, when they came to the inhabitants of a town, they asked them for food, but they refused them hospitality. They found there a wall on the point of falling down, but he set it up straight. (Moses) said: "If thou hadst wished, surely thou couldst have exacted some recompense for it!"

قال هذا فراق بيني وبينك سأنبئك بتأويل ما لم تستطع عليه صبرا
He answered: "This is the parting between me and thee: now will I tell thee the interpretation of (those things) over which thou wast unable to hold patience.

أما السفينة فكانت لمساكين يعملون في البحر فأردت أن أعيبها وكان وراءهم ملك يأخذ كل سفينة غصبا
"As for the boat, it belonged to certain men in dire want: they plied on the water: I but wished to render it unserviceable, for there was after them a certain king who seized on every boat by force.

وأما الغلام فكان أبواه مؤمنين فخشينا أن يرهقهما طغيانا وكفرا
"As for the youth, his parents were people of Faith, and we feared that he would grieve them by obstinate rebellion and ingratitude (to Allah and man).

فأردنا أن يبدلهما ربهما خيرا منه زكاة وأقرب رحما
"So we desired that their Lord would give them in exchange (a son) better in purity (of conduct) and closer in affection.

وأما الجدار فكان لغلامين يتيمين في المدينة وكان تحته كنز لهما وكان أبوهما صالحا فأراد ربك أن يبلغا أشدهما ويستخرجا كنزهما رحمة من ربك وما فعلته عن أمري ذلك تأويل ما لم تسطع عليه صبرا
"As for the wall, it belonged to two youths, orphans, in the Town; there was, beneath it, a buried treasure, to which they were entitled: their father had been a righteous man: So thy Lord desired that they should attain their age of full strength and get out their treasure - a mercy (and favour) from thy Lord. I did it not of my own accord. Such is the interpretation of (those things) over which thou wast unable to hold patience."

ويسألونك عن ذي القرنين قل سأتلو عليكم منه ذكرا
They ask thee concerning Zul-qarnain. Say, "I will rehearse to you something of his story."

إنا مكنا له في الأرض وآتيناه من كل شيء سببا
Verily We established his power on earth, and We gave him the ways and the means to all ends.

فأتبع سببا
One (such) way he followed,

حتى إذا بلغ مغرب الشمس وجدها تغرب في عين حمئة ووجد عندها قوما قلنا يا ذا القرنين إما أن تعذب وإما أن تتخذ فيهم حسنا
Until, when he reached the setting of the sun, he found it set in a spring of murky water: Near it he found a People: We said: "O Zul-qarnain! (thou hast authority,) either to punish them, or to treat them with kindness."

قال أما من ظلم فسوف نعذبه ثم يرد إلى ربه فيعذبه عذابا نكرا
He said: "Whoever doth wrong, him shall we punish; then shall he be sent back to his Lord; and He will punish him with a punishment unheard-of (before).

وأما من آمن وعمل صالحا فله جزاء الحسنى وسنقول له من أمرنا يسرا
"But whoever believes, and works righteousness,- he shall have a goodly reward, and easy will be his task as We order it by our Command."

ثم أتبع سببا
Then followed he (another) way,

حتى إذا بلغ مطلع الشمس وجدها تطلع على قوم لم نجعل لهم من دونها سترا
Until, when he came to the rising of the sun, he found it rising on a people for whom We had provided no covering protection against the sun.

كذلك وقد أحطنا بما لديه خبرا
(He left them) as they were: We completely understood what was before him.

ثم أتبع سببا
Then followed he (another) way,

حتى إذا بلغ بين السدين وجد من دونهما قوما لا يكادون يفقهون قولا
Until, when he reached (a tract) between two mountains, he found, beneath them, a people who scarcely understood a word.

قالوا يا ذا القرنين إن يأجوج ومأجوج مفسدون في الأرض فهل نجعل لك خرجا على أن تجعل بيننا وبينهم سدا
They said: "O Zul-qarnain! the Gog and Magog (People) do great mischief on earth: shall we then render thee tribute in order that thou mightest erect a barrier between us and them?

قال ما مكني فيه ربي خير فأعينوني بقوة أجعل بينكم وبينهم ردما
He said: "(The power) in which my Lord has established me is better (than tribute): Help me therefore with strength (and labour): I will erect a strong barrier between you and them:

آتوني زبر الحديد حتى إذا ساوى بين الصدفين قال انفخوا حتى إذا جعله نارا قال آتوني أفرغ عليه قطرا
"Bring me blocks of iron." At length, when he had filled up the space between the two steep mountain-sides, He said, "Blow (with your bellows)" Then, when he had made it (red) as fire, he said: "Bring me, that I may pour over it, molten lead."

فما اسطاعوا أن يظهروه وما استطاعوا له نقبا
Thus were they made powerless to scale it or to dig through it.

قال هذا رحمة من ربي فإذا جاء وعد ربي جعله دكاء وكان وعد ربي حقا
He said: "This is a mercy from my Lord: But when the promise of my Lord comes to pass, He will make it into dust; and the promise of my Lord is true."

وتركنا بعضهم يومئذ يموج في بعض ونفخ في الصور فجمعناهم جمعا
On that day We shall leave them to surge like waves on one another: the trumpet will be blown, and We shall collect them all together.

وعرضنا جهنم يومئذ للكافرين عرضا
And We shall present Hell that day for Unbelievers to see, all spread out,-

الذين كانت أعينهم في غطاء عن ذكري وكانوا لا يستطيعون سمعا
(Unbelievers) whose eyes had been under a veil from remembrance of Me, and who had been unable even to hear.

أفحسب الذين كفروا أن يتخذوا عبادي من دوني أولياء إنا أعتدنا جهنم للكافرين نزلا
Do the Unbelievers think that they can take My servants as protectors besides Me? Verily We have prepared Hell for the Unbelievers for (their) entertainment.

قل هل ننبئكم بالأخسرين أعمالا
Say: "Shall we tell you of those who lose most in respect of their deeds?-

الذين ضل سعيهم في الحياة الدنيا وهم يحسبون أنهم يحسنون صنعا
"Those whose efforts have been wasted in this life, while they thought that they were acquiring good by their works?"

أولئك الذين كفروا بآيات ربهم ولقائه فحبطت أعمالهم فلا نقيم لهم يوم القيامة وزنا
They are those who deny the Signs of their Lord and the fact of their having to meet Him (in the Hereafter): vain will be their works, nor shall We, on the Day of Judgment, give them any weight.

ذلك جزاؤهم جهنم بما كفروا واتخذوا آياتي ورسلي هزوا
That is their reward, Hell, because they rejected Faith, and took My Signs and My Messengers by way of jest.

إن الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات كانت لهم جنات الفردوس نزلا
As to those who believe and work righteous deeds, they have, for their entertainment, the Gardens of Paradise,

خالدين فيها لا يبغون عنها حولا
Wherein they shall dwell (for aye): no change will they wish for from them.

قل لو كان البحر مدادا لكلمات ربي لنفد البحر قبل أن تنفد كلمات ربي ولو جئنا بمثله مددا
Say: "If the ocean were ink (wherewith to write out) the words of my Lord, sooner would the ocean be exhausted than would the words of my Lord, even if we added another ocean like it, for its aid."

قل إنما أنا بشر مثلكم يوحى إلي أنما إلهكم إله واحد فمن كان يرجو لقاء ربه فليعمل عملا صالحا ولا يشرك بعبادة ربه أحدا
Say: "I am but a man like yourselves, (but) the inspiration has come to me, that your Allah is one Allah: whoever expects to meet his Lord, let him work righteousness, and, in the worship of his Lord, admit no one as partner.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم كهيعص
Kaf. Ha. Ya. 'Ain. Sad.

ذكر رحمت ربك عبده زكريا
(This is) a recital of the Mercy of thy Lord to His servant Zakariya.

إذ نادى ربه نداء خفيا
Behold! he cried to his Lord in secret,

قال رب إني وهن العظم مني واشتعل الرأس شيبا ولم أكن بدعائك رب شقيا
Praying: "O my Lord! infirm indeed are my bones, and the hair of my head doth glisten with grey: but never am I unblest, O my Lord, in my prayer to Thee!

وإني خفت الموالي من ورائي وكانت امرأتي عاقرا فهب لي من لدنك وليا
"Now I fear (what) my relatives (and colleagues) (will do) after me: but my wife is barren: so give me an heir as from Thyself,-

يرثني ويرث من آل يعقوب واجعله رب رضيا
"(One that) will (truly) represent me, and represent the posterity of Jacob; and make him, O my Lord! one with whom Thou art well-pleased!"

يا زكريا إنا نبشرك بغلام اسمه يحيى لم نجعل له من قبل سميا
(His prayer was answered): "O Zakariya! We give thee good news of a son: His name shall be Yahya: on none by that name have We conferred distinction before."

قال رب أنى يكون لي غلام وكانت امرأتي عاقرا وقد بلغت من الكبر عتيا
He said: "O my Lord! How shall I have a son, when my wife is barren and I have grown quite decrepit from old age?"

قال كذلك قال ربك هو علي هين وقد خلقتك من قبل ولم تك شيئا
He said: "So (it will be) thy Lord saith, 'that is easy for Me: I did indeed create thee before, when thou hadst been nothing!'"

قال رب اجعل لي آية قال آيتك ألا تكلم الناس ثلاث ليال سويا
(Zakariya) said: "O my Lord! give me a Sign." "Thy Sign," was the answer, "Shall be that thou shalt speak to no man for three nights, although thou art not dumb."

فخرج على قومه من المحراب فأوحى إليهم أن سبحوا بكرة وعشيا
So Zakariya came out to his people from him chamber: He told them by signs to celebrate Allah's praises in the morning and in the evening.

يا يحيى خذ الكتاب بقوة وآتيناه الحكم صبيا
(To his son came the command): "O Yahya! take hold of the Book with might": and We gave him Wisdom even as a youth,

وحنانا من لدنا وزكاة وكان تقيا
And piety (for all creatures) as from Us, and purity: He was devout,

وبرا بوالديه ولم يكن جبارا عصيا
And kind to his parents, and he was not overbearing or rebellious.

وسلام عليه يوم ولد ويوم يموت ويوم يبعث حيا
So Peace on him the day he was born, the day that he dies, and the day that he will be raised up to life (again)!

واذكر في الكتاب مريم إذ انتبذت من أهلها مكانا شرقيا
Relate in the Book (the story of) Mary, when she withdrew from her family to a place in the East.

فاتخذت من دونهم حجابا فأرسلنا إليها روحنا فتمثل لها بشرا سويا
She placed a screen (to screen herself) from them; then We sent her our angel, and he appeared before her as a man in all respects.

قالت إني أعوذ بالرحمن منك إن كنت تقيا
She said: "I seek refuge from thee to (Allah) Most Gracious: (come not near) if thou dost fear Allah."

قال إنما أنا رسول ربك لأهب لك غلاما زكيا
He said: "Nay, I am only a messenger from thy Lord, (to announce) to thee the gift of a holy son.

قالت أنى يكون لي غلام ولم يمسسني بشر ولم أك بغيا
She said: "How shall I have a son, seeing that no man has touched me, and I am not unchaste?"

قال كذلك قال ربك هو علي هين ولنجعله آية للناس ورحمة منا وكان أمرا مقضيا
He said: "So (it will be): Thy Lord saith, 'that is easy for Me: and (We wish) to appoint him as a Sign unto men and a Mercy from Us': It is a matter (so) decreed."

فحملته فانتبذت به مكانا قصيا
So she conceived him, and she retired with him to a remote place.

فأجاءها المخاض إلى جذع النخلة قالت يا ليتني مت قبل هذا وكنت نسيا منسيا
And the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree: She cried (in her anguish): "Ah! would that I had died before this! would that I had been a thing forgotten and out of sight!"

فناداها من تحتها ألا تحزني قد جعل ربك تحتك سريا
But (a voice) cried to her from beneath the (palm-tree): "Grieve not! for thy Lord hath provided a rivulet beneath thee;

وهزي إليك بجذع النخلة تساقط عليك رطبا جنيا
"And shake towards thyself the trunk of the palm-tree: It will let fall fresh ripe dates upon thee.

فكلي واشربي وقري عينا فإما ترين من البشر أحدا فقولي إني نذرت للرحمن صوما فلن أكلم اليوم إنسيا
"So eat and drink and cool (thine) eye. And if thou dost see any man, say, 'I have vowed a fast to (Allah) Most Gracious, and this day will I enter into not talk with any human being'"

فأتت به قومها تحمله قالوا يا مريم لقد جئت شيئا فريا
At length she brought the (babe) to her people, carrying him (in her arms). They said: "O Mary! truly an amazing thing hast thou brought!

يا أخت هارون ما كان أبوك امرأ سوء وما كانت أمك بغيا
"O sister of Aaron! Thy father was not a man of evil, nor thy mother a woman unchaste!"

فأشارت إليه قالوا كيف نكلم من كان في المهد صبيا
But she pointed to the babe. They said: "How can we talk to one who is a child in the cradle?"

قال إني عبد الله آتاني الكتاب وجعلني نبيا
He said: "I am indeed a servant of Allah: He hath given me revelation and made me a prophet;

وجعلني مباركا أين ما كنت وأوصاني بالصلاة والزكاة ما دمت حيا
"And He hath made me blessed wheresoever I be, and hath enjoined on me Prayer and Charity as long as I live;

وبرا بوالدتي ولم يجعلني جبارا شقيا
"(He) hath made me kind to my mother, and not overbearing or miserable;

والسلام علي يوم ولدت ويوم أموت ويوم أبعث حيا
"So peace is on me the day I was born, the day that I die, and the day that I shall be raised up to life (again)"!

ذلك عيسى ابن مريم قول الحق الذي فيه يمترون
Such (was) Jesus the son of Mary: (it is) a statement of truth, about which they (vainly) dispute.

ما كان لله أن يتخذ من ولد سبحانه إذا قضى أمرا فإنما يقول له كن فيكون
It is not befitting to (the majesty of) Allah that He should beget a son. Glory be to Him! when He determines a matter, He only says to it, "Be", and it is.

وإن الله ربي وربكم فاعبدوه هذا صراط مستقيم
Verily Allah is my Lord and your Lord: Him therefore serve ye: this is a Way that is straight.

فاختلف الأحزاب من بينهم فويل للذين كفروا من مشهد يوم عظيم
But the sects differ among themselves: and woe to the unbelievers because of the (coming) Judgment of a Momentous Day!

أسمع بهم وأبصر يوم يأتوننا لكن الظالمون اليوم في ضلال مبين
How plainly will they see and hear, the Day that they will appear before Us! but the unjust today are in error manifest!

وأنذرهم يوم الحسرة إذ قضي الأمر وهم في غفلة وهم لا يؤمنون
But warn them of the Day of Distress, when the matter will be determined: for (behold,) they are negligent and they do not believe!

إنا نحن نرث الأرض ومن عليها وإلينا يرجعون
It is We Who will inherit the earth, and all beings thereon: to Us will they all be returned.

واذكر في الكتاب إبراهيم إنه كان صديقا نبيا
(Also mention in the Book (the story of) Abraham: He was a man of Truth, a prophet.

إذ قال لأبيه يا أبت لم تعبد ما لا يسمع ولا يبصر ولا يغني عنك شيئا
Behold, he said to his father: "O my father! why worship that which heareth not and seeth not, and can profit thee nothing?

يا أبت إني قد جاءني من العلم ما لم يأتك فاتبعني أهدك صراطا سويا
"O my father! to me hath come knowledge which hath not reached thee: so follow me: I will guide thee to a way that is even and straight.

يا أبت لا تعبد الشيطان إن الشيطان كان للرحمن عصيا
"O my father! serve not Satan: for Satan is a rebel against (Allah) Most Gracious.

يا أبت إني أخاف أن يمسك عذاب من الرحمن فتكون للشيطان وليا
"O my father! I fear lest a Penalty afflict thee from (Allah) Most Gracious, so that thou become to Satan a friend."

قال أراغب أنت عن آلهتي يا إبراهيم لئن لم تنته لأرجمنك واهجرني مليا
(The father) replied: "Dost thou hate my gods, O Abraham? If thou forbear not, I will indeed stone thee: Now get away from me for a good long while!"

قال سلام عليك سأستغفر لك ربي إنه كان بي حفيا
Abraham said: "Peace be on thee: I will pray to my Lord for thy forgiveness: for He is to me Most Gracious.

وأعتزلكم وما تدعون من دون الله وأدعو ربي عسى ألا أكون بدعاء ربي شقيا
"And I will turn away from you (all) and from those whom ye invoke besides Allah: I will call on my Lord: perhaps, by my prayer to my Lord, I shall be not unblest."

فلما اعتزلهم وما يعبدون من دون الله وهبنا له إسحاق ويعقوب وكلا جعلنا نبيا
When he had turned away from them and from those whom they worshipped besides Allah, We bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob, and each one of them We made a prophet.

ووهبنا لهم من رحمتنا وجعلنا لهم لسان صدق عليا
And We bestowed of Our Mercy on them, and We granted them lofty honour on the tongue of truth.

واذكر في الكتاب موسى إنه كان مخلصا وكان رسولا نبيا
Also mention in the Book (the story of) Moses: for he was specially chosen, and he was a messenger (and) a prophet.

وناديناه من جانب الطور الأيمن وقربناه نجيا
And we called him from the right side of Mount (Sinai), and made him draw near to Us, for mystic (converse).

ووهبنا له من رحمتنا أخاه هارون نبيا
And, out of Our Mercy, We gave him his brother Aaron, (also) a prophet.

واذكر في الكتاب إسماعيل إنه كان صادق الوعد وكان رسولا نبيا
Also mention in the Book (the story of) Isma'il: He was (strictly) true to what he promised, and he was a messenger (and) a prophet.

وكان يأمر أهله بالصلاة والزكاة وكان عند ربه مرضيا
He used to enjoin on his people Prayer and Charity, and he was most acceptable in the sight of his Lord.

واذكر في الكتاب إدريس إنه كان صديقا نبيا
Also mention in the Book the case of Idris: He was a man of truth (and sincerity), (and) a prophet:

ورفعناه مكانا عليا
And We raised him to a lofty station.

أولئك الذين أنعم الله عليهم من النبيين من ذرية آدم وممن حملنا مع نوح ومن ذرية إبراهيم وإسرائيل وممن هدينا واجتبينا إذا تتلى عليهم آيات الرحمن خروا سجدا وبكيا
Those were some of the prophets on whom Allah did bestow His Grace,- of the posterity of Adam, and of those who We carried (in the Ark) with Noah, and of the posterity of Abraham and Israel of those whom We guided and chose. Whenever the Signs of (Allah) Most Gracious were rehearsed to them, they would fall down in prostrate adoration and in tears.

فخلف من بعدهم خلف أضاعوا الصلاة واتبعوا الشهوات فسوف يلقون غيا
But after them there followed a posterity who missed prayers and followed after lusts soon, then, will they face Destruction,-

إلا من تاب وآمن وعمل صالحا فأولئك يدخلون الجنة ولا يظلمون شيئا
Except those who repent and believe, and work righteousness: for these will enter the Garden and will not be wronged in the least,-

جنات عدن التي وعد الرحمن عباده بالغيب إنه كان وعده مأتيا
Gardens of Eternity, those which (Allah) Most Gracious has promised to His servants in the Unseen: for His promise must (necessarily) come to pass.

لا يسمعون فيها لغوا إلا سلاما ولهم رزقهم فيها بكرة وعشيا
They will not there hear any vain discourse, but only salutations of Peace: And they will have therein their sustenance, morning and evening.

تلك الجنة التي نورث من عبادنا من كان تقيا
Such is the Garden which We give as an inheritance to those of Our servants who guard against Evil.

وما نتنزل إلا بأمر ربك له ما بين أيدينا وما خلفنا وما بين ذلك وما كان ربك نسيا
(The angels say:) "We descend not but by command of thy Lord: to Him belongeth what is before us and what is behind us, and what is between: and thy Lord never doth forget,-

رب السماوات والأرض وما بينهما فاعبده واصطبر لعبادته هل تعلم له سميا
"Lord of the heavens and of the earth, and of all that is between them; so worship Him, and be constant and patient in His worship: knowest thou of any who is worthy of the same Name as He?"

ويقول الإنسان أإذا ما مت لسوف أخرج حيا
Man says: "What! When I am dead, shall I then be raised up alive?"

أولا يذكر الإنسان أنا خلقناه من قبل ولم يك شيئا
But does not man call to mind that We created him before out of nothing?

فوربك لنحشرنهم والشياطين ثم لنحضرنهم حول جهنم جثيا
So, by thy Lord, without doubt, We shall gather them together, and (also) the Evil Ones (with them); then shall We bring them forth on their knees round about Hell;

ثم لننزعن من كل شيعة أيهم أشد على الرحمن عتيا
Then shall We certainly drag out from every sect all those who were worst in obstinate rebellion against (Allah) Most Gracious.

ثم لنحن أعلم بالذين هم أولى بها صليا
And certainly We know best those who are most worthy of being burned therein.

وإن منكم إلا واردها كان على ربك حتما مقضيا
Not one of you but will pass over it: this is, with thy Lord, a Decree which must be accomplished.

ثم ننجي الذين اتقوا ونذر الظالمين فيها جثيا
But We shall save those who guarded against evil, and We shall leave the wrong-doers therein, (humbled) to their knees.

وإذا تتلى عليهم آياتنا بينات قال الذين كفروا للذين آمنوا أي الفريقين خير مقاما وأحسن نديا
When Our Clear Signs are rehearsed to them, the Unbelievers say to those who believe, "Which of the two sides is best in point of position? Which makes the best show in council?"

وكم أهلكنا قبلهم من قرن هم أحسن أثاثا ورئيا
But how many (countless) generations before them have we destroyed, who were even better in equipment and in glitter to the eye?

قل من كان في الضلالة فليمدد له الرحمن مدا حتى إذا رأوا ما يوعدون إما العذاب وإما الساعة فسيعلمون من هو شر مكانا وأضعف جندا
Say: "If any men go astray, (Allah) Most Gracious extends (the rope) to them, until, when they see the warning of Allah (being fulfilled) - either in punishment or in (the approach of) the Hour,- they will at length realise who is worst in position, and (who) weakest in forces!

ويزيد الله الذين اهتدوا هدى والباقيات الصالحات خير عند ربك ثوابا وخير مردا
"And Allah doth advance in guidance those who seek guidance: and the things that endure, Good Deeds, are best in the sight of thy Lord, as rewards, and best in respect of (their) eventual return."

أفرأيت الذي كفر بآياتنا وقال لأوتين مالا وولدا
Hast thou then seen the (sort of) man who rejects Our Signs, yet says: "I shall certainly be given wealth and children?"

أطلع الغيب أم اتخذ عند الرحمن عهدا
Has he penetrated to the Unseen, or has he taken a contract with (Allah) Most Gracious?

كلا سنكتب ما يقول ونمد له من العذاب مدا
Nay! We shall record what he says, and We shall add and add to his punishment.

ونرثه ما يقول ويأتينا فردا
To Us shall return all that he talks of and he shall appear before Us bare and alone.

واتخذوا من دون الله آلهة ليكونوا لهم عزا
And they have taken (for worship) gods other than Allah, to give them power and glory!

كلا سيكفرون بعبادتهم ويكونون عليهم ضدا
Instead, they shall reject their worship, and become adversaries against them.

ألم تر أنا أرسلنا الشياطين على الكافرين تؤزهم أزا
Seest thou not that We have set the Evil Ones on against the unbelievers, to incite them with fury?

فلا تعجل عليهم إنما نعد لهم عدا
So make no haste against them, for We but count out to them a (limited) number (of days).

يوم نحشر المتقين إلى الرحمن وفدا
The day We shall gather the righteous to (Allah) Most Gracious, like a band presented before a king for honours,

ونسوق المجرمين إلى جهنم وردا
And We shall drive the sinners to Hell, like thirsty cattle driven down to water,-

لا يملكون الشفاعة إلا من اتخذ عند الرحمن عهدا
None shall have the power of intercession, but such a one as has received permission (or promise) from (Allah) Most Gracious.

وقالوا اتخذ الرحمن ولدا
They say: "(Allah) Most Gracious has begotten a son!"

لقد جئتم شيئا إدا
Indeed ye have put forth a thing most monstrous!

تكاد السماوات يتفطرن منه وتنشق الأرض وتخر الجبال هدا
At it the skies are ready to burst, the earth to split asunder, and the mountains to fall down in utter ruin,

أن دعوا للرحمن ولدا
That they should invoke a son for (Allah) Most Gracious.

وما ينبغي للرحمن أن يتخذ ولدا
For it is not consonant with the majesty of (Allah) Most Gracious that He should beget a son.

إن كل من في السماوات والأرض إلا آتي الرحمن عبدا
Not one of the beings in the heavens and the earth but must come to (Allah) Most Gracious as a servant.

لقد أحصاهم وعدهم عدا
He does take an account of them (all), and hath numbered them (all) exactly.

وكلهم آتيه يوم القيامة فردا
And everyone of them will come to Him singly on the Day of Judgment.

إن الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات سيجعل لهم الرحمن ودا
On those who believe and work deeds of righteousness, will (Allah) Most Gracious bestow love.

فإنما يسرناه بلسانك لتبشر به المتقين وتنذر به قوما لدا
So have We made the (Qur'an) easy in thine own tongue, that with it thou mayest give Glad Tidings to the righteous, and warnings to people given to contention.

وكم أهلكنا قبلهم من قرن هل تحس منهم من أحد أو تسمع لهم ركزا
But how many (countless) generations before them have We destroyed? Canst thou find a single one of them (now) or hear (so much as) a whisper of them?

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم طه
Ta-Ha.

ما أنزلنا عليك القرآن لتشقى
We have not sent down the Qur'an to thee to be (an occasion) for thy distress,

إلا تذكرة لمن يخشى
But only as an admonition to those who fear (Allah),-

تنزيلا ممن خلق الأرض والسماوات العلى
A revelation from Him Who created the earth and the heavens on high.

الرحمن على العرش استوى
(Allah) Most Gracious is firmly established on the throne (of authority).

له ما في السماوات وما في الأرض وما بينهما وما تحت الثرى
To Him belongs what is in the heavens and on earth, and all between them, and all beneath the soil.

وإن تجهر بالقول فإنه يعلم السر وأخفى
If thou pronounce the word aloud, (it is no matter): for verily He knoweth what is secret and what is yet more hidden.

الله لا إله إلا هو له الأسماء الحسنى
Allah! there is no god but He! To Him belong the most Beautiful Names.

وهل أتاك حديث موسى
Has the story of Moses reached thee?

إذ رأى نارا فقال لأهله امكثوا إني آنست نارا لعلي آتيكم منها بقبس أو أجد على النار هدى
Behold, he saw a fire: So he said to his family, "Tarry ye; I perceive a fire; perhaps I can bring you some burning brand therefrom, or find some guidance at the fire."

فلما أتاها نودي يا موسى
But when he came to the fire, a voice was heard: "O Moses!

إني أنا ربك فاخلع نعليك إنك بالواد المقدس طوى
"Verily I am thy Lord! therefore (in My presence) put off thy shoes: thou art in the sacred valley Tuwa.

وأنا اخترتك فاستمع لما يوحى
"I have chosen thee: listen, then, to the inspiration (sent to thee).

إنني أنا الله لا إله إلا أنا فاعبدني وأقم الصلاة لذكري
"Verily, I am Allah: There is no god but I: So serve thou Me (only), and establish regular prayer for celebrating My praise.

إن الساعة آتية أكاد أخفيها لتجزى كل نفس بما تسعى
"Verily the Hour is coming - My design is to keep it hidden - for every soul to receive its reward by the measure of its Endeavour.

فلا يصدنك عنها من لا يؤمن بها واتبع هواه فتردى
"Therefore let not such as believe not therein but follow their own lusts, divert thee therefrom, lest thou perish!"..

وما تلك بيمينك يا موسى
"And what is that in the right hand, O Moses?"

قال هي عصاي أتوكأ عليها وأهش بها على غنمي ولي فيها مآرب أخرى
He said, "It is my rod: on it I lean; with it I beat down fodder for my flocks; and in it I find other uses."

قال ألقها يا موسى
(Allah) said, "Throw it, O Moses!"

فألقاها فإذا هي حية تسعى
He threw it, and behold! It was a snake, active in motion.

قال خذها ولا تخف سنعيدها سيرتها الأولى
(Allah) said, "Seize it, and fear not: We shall return it at once to its former condition"..

واضمم يدك إلى جناحك تخرج بيضاء من غير سوء آية أخرى
"Now draw thy hand close to thy side: It shall come forth white (and shining), without harm (or stain),- as another Sign,-

لنريك من آياتنا الكبرى
"In order that We may show thee (two) of our Greater Signs.

اذهب إلى فرعون إنه طغى
"Go thou to Pharaoh, for he has indeed transgressed all bounds."

قال رب اشرح لي صدري
(Moses) said: "O my Lord! expand me my breast;

ويسر لي أمري
"Ease my task for me;

واحلل عقدة من لساني
"And remove the impediment from my speech,

يفقهوا قولي
"So they may understand what I say:

واجعل لي وزيرا من أهلي
"And give me a Minister from my family,

هارون أخي
"Aaron, my brother;

اشدد به أزري
"Add to my strength through him,

وأشركه في أمري
"And make him share my task:

كي نسبحك كثيرا
"That we may celebrate Thy praise without stint,

ونذكرك كثيرا
"And remember Thee without stint:

إنك كنت بنا بصيرا
"For Thou art He that (ever) regardeth us."

قال قد أوتيت سؤلك يا موسى
(Allah) said: "Granted is thy prayer, O Moses!"

ولقد مننا عليك مرة أخرى
"And indeed We conferred a favour on thee another time (before).

إذ أوحينا إلى أمك ما يوحى
"Behold! We sent to thy mother, by inspiration, the message:

أن اقذفيه في التابوت فاقذفيه في اليم فليلقه اليم بالساحل يأخذه عدو لي وعدو له وألقيت عليك محبة مني ولتصنع على عيني
"'Throw (the child) into the chest, and throw (the chest) into the river: the river will cast him up on the bank, and he will be taken up by one who is an enemy to Me and an enemy to him': But I cast (the garment of) love over thee from Me: and (this) in order that thou mayest be reared under Mine eye.

إذ تمشي أختك فتقول هل أدلكم على من يكفله فرجعناك إلى أمك كي تقر عينها ولا تحزن وقتلت نفسا فنجيناك من الغم وفتناك فتونا فلبثت سنين في أهل مدين ثم جئت على قدر يا موسى
"Behold! thy sister goeth forth and saith, 'shall I show you one who will nurse and rear the (child)?' So We brought thee back to thy mother, that her eye might be cooled and she should not grieve. Then thou didst slay a man, but We saved thee from trouble, and We tried thee in various ways. Then didst thou tarry a number of years with the people of Midian. Then didst thou come hither as ordained, O Moses!

واصطنعتك لنفسي
"And I have prepared thee for Myself (for service)"..

اذهب أنت وأخوك بآياتي ولا تنيا في ذكري
"Go, thou and thy brother, with My Signs, and slacken not, either of you, in keeping Me in remembrance.

اذهبا إلى فرعون إنه طغى
"Go, both of you, to Pharaoh, for he has indeed transgressed all bounds;

فقولا له قولا لينا لعله يتذكر أو يخشى
"But speak to him mildly; perchance he may take warning or fear (Allah)."

قالا ربنا إننا نخاف أن يفرط علينا أو أن يطغى
They (Moses and Aaron) said: "Our Lord! We fear lest he hasten with insolence against us, or lest he transgress all bounds."

قال لا تخافا إنني معكما أسمع وأرى
He said: "Fear not: for I am with you: I hear and see (everything).

فأتياه فقولا إنا رسولا ربك فأرسل معنا بني إسرائيل ولا تعذبهم قد جئناك بآية من ربك والسلام على من اتبع الهدى
"So go ye both to him, and say, 'Verily we are messengers sent by thy Lord: Send forth, therefore, the Children of Israel with us, and afflict them not: with a Sign, indeed, have we come from thy Lord! and peace to all who follow guidance!

إنا قد أوحي إلينا أن العذاب على من كذب وتولى
"'Verily it has been revealed to us that the Penalty (awaits) those who reject and turn away.'"

قال فمن ربكما يا موسى
(When this message was delivered), (Pharaoh) said: "Who, then, O Moses, is the Lord of you two?"

قال ربنا الذي أعطى كل شيء خلقه ثم هدى
He said: "Our Lord is He Who gave to each (created) thing its form and nature, and further, gave (it) guidance."

قال فما بال القرون الأولى
(Pharaoh) said: "What then is the condition of previous generations?"

قال علمها عند ربي في كتاب لا يضل ربي ولا ينسى
He replied: "The knowledge of that is with my Lord, duly recorded: my Lord never errs, nor forgets,-

الذي جعل لكم الأرض مهدا وسلك لكم فيها سبلا وأنزل من السماء ماء فأخرجنا به أزواجا من نبات شتى
"He Who has, made for you the earth like a carpet spread out; has enabled you to go about therein by roads (and channels); and has sent down water from the sky." With it have We produced diverse pairs of plants each separate from the others.

كلوا وارعوا أنعامكم إن في ذلك لآيات لأولي النهى
Eat (for yourselves) and pasture your cattle: verily, in this are Signs for men endued with understanding.

منها خلقناكم وفيها نعيدكم ومنها نخرجكم تارة أخرى
From the (earth) did We create you, and into it shall We return you, and from it shall We bring you out once again.

ولقد أريناه آياتنا كلها فكذب وأبى
And We showed Pharaoh all Our Signs, but he did reject and refuse.

قال أجئتنا لتخرجنا من أرضنا بسحرك يا موسى
He said: "Hast thou come to drive us out of our land with thy magic, O Moses?

فلنأتينك بسحر مثله فاجعل بيننا وبينك موعدا لا نخلفه نحن ولا أنت مكانا سوى
"But we can surely produce magic to match thine! So make a tryst between us and thee, which we shall not fail to keep - neither we nor thou - in a place where both shall have even chances."

قال موعدكم يوم الزينة وأن يحشر الناس ضحى
Moses said: "Your tryst is the Day of the Festival, and let the people be assembled when the sun is well up."

فتولى فرعون فجمع كيده ثم أتى
So Pharaoh withdrew: He concerted his plan, and then came (back).

قال لهم موسى ويلكم لا تفتروا على الله كذبا فيسحتكم بعذاب وقد خاب من افترى
Moses said to him: Woe to you! Forge not ye a lie against Allah, lest He destroy you (at once) utterly by chastisement: the forger must suffer frustration!"

فتنازعوا أمرهم بينهم وأسروا النجوى
So they disputed, one with another, over their affair, but they kept their talk secret.

قالوا إن هذان لساحران يريدان أن يخرجاكم من أرضكم بسحرهما ويذهبا بطريقتكم المثلى
They said: "These two are certainly (expert) magicians: their object is to drive you out from your land with their magic, and to do away with your most cherished institutions.

فأجمعوا كيدكم ثم ائتوا صفا وقد أفلح اليوم من استعلى
"Therefore concert your plan, and then assemble in (serried) ranks: He wins (all along) today who gains the upper hand."

قالوا يا موسى إما أن تلقي وإما أن نكون أول من ألقى
They said: "O Moses! whether wilt thou that thou throw (first) or that we be the first to throw?"

قال بل ألقوا فإذا حبالهم وعصيهم يخيل إليه من سحرهم أنها تسعى
He said, "Nay, throw ye first!" Then behold their ropes and their rods-so it seemed to him on account of their magic - began to be in lively motion!

فأوجس في نفسه خيفة موسى
So Moses conceived in his mind a (sort of) fear.

قلنا لا تخف إنك أنت الأعلى
We said: "Fear not! for thou hast indeed the upper hand:

وألق ما في يمينك تلقف ما صنعوا إنما صنعوا كيد ساحر ولا يفلح الساحر حيث أتى
"Throw that which is in thy right hand: Quickly will it swallow up that which they have faked what they have faked is but a magician's trick: and the magician thrives not, (no matter) where he goes."

فألقي السحرة سجدا قالوا آمنا برب هارون وموسى
So the magicians were thrown down to prostration: they said, "We believe in the Lord of Aaron and Moses".

قال آمنتم له قبل أن آذن لكم إنه لكبيركم الذي علمكم السحر فلأقطعن أيديكم وأرجلكم من خلاف ولأصلبنكم في جذوع النخل ولتعلمن أينا أشد عذابا وأبقى
(Pharaoh) said: "Believe ye in Him before I give you permission? Surely this must be your leader, who has taught you magic! be sure I will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, and I will have you crucified on trunks of palm-trees: so shall ye know for certain, which of us can give the more severe and the more lasting punishment!"

قالوا لن نؤثرك على ما جاءنا من البينات والذي فطرنا فاقض ما أنت قاض إنما تقضي هذه الحياة الدنيا
They said: "Never shall we regard thee as more than the Clear Signs that have come to us, or than Him Who created us! so decree whatever thou desirest to decree: for thou canst only decree (touching) the life of this world.

إنا آمنا بربنا ليغفر لنا خطايانا وما أكرهتنا عليه من السحر والله خير وأبقى
"For us, we have believed in our Lord: may He forgive us our faults, and the magic to which thou didst compel us: for Allah is Best and Most Abiding."

إنه من يأت ربه مجرما فإن له جهنم لا يموت فيها ولا يحيى
Verily he who comes to his Lord as a sinner (at Judgment),- for him is Hell: therein shall he neither die nor live.

ومن يأته مؤمنا قد عمل الصالحات فأولئك لهم الدرجات العلى
But such as come to Him as Believers who have worked righteous deeds,- for them are ranks exalted,-

جنات عدن تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها وذلك جزاء من تزكى
Gardens of Eternity, beneath which flow rivers: they will dwell therein for aye: such is the reward of those who purify themselves (from evil).

ولقد أوحينا إلى موسى أن أسر بعبادي فاضرب لهم طريقا في البحر يبسا لا تخاف دركا ولا تخشى
We sent an inspiration to Moses: "Travel by night with My servants, and strike a dry path for them through the sea, without fear of being overtaken (by Pharaoh) and without (any other) fear."

فأتبعهم فرعون بجنوده فغشيهم من اليم ما غشيهم
Then Pharaoh pursued them with his forces, but the waters completely overwhelmed them and covered them up.

وأضل فرعون قومه وما هدى
Pharaoh led his people astray instead of leading them aright.

يا بني إسرائيل قد أنجيناكم من عدوكم وواعدناكم جانب الطور الأيمن ونزلنا عليكم المن والسلوى
O ye Children of Israel! We delivered you from your enemy, and We made a Covenant with you on the right side of Mount (Sinai), and We sent down to you Manna and quails:

كلوا من طيبات ما رزقناكم ولا تطغوا فيه فيحل عليكم غضبي ومن يحلل عليه غضبي فقد هوى
(Saying): "Eat of the good things We have provided for your sustenance, but commit no excess therein, lest My Wrath should justly descend on you: and those on whom descends My Wrath do perish indeed!

وإني لغفار لمن تاب وآمن وعمل صالحا ثم اهتدى
"But, without doubt, I am (also) He that forgives again and again, to those who repent, believe, and do right, who,- in fine, are ready to receive true guidance."

وما أعجلك عن قومك يا موسى
(When Moses was up on the Mount, Allah said:) "What made thee hasten in advance of thy people, O Moses?"

قال هم أولاء على أثري وعجلت إليك رب لترضى
He replied: "Behold, they are close on my footsteps: I hastened to thee, O my Lord, to please thee."

قال فإنا قد فتنا قومك من بعدك وأضلهم السامري
(Allah) said: "We have tested thy people in thy absence: the Samiri has led them astray."

فرجع موسى إلى قومه غضبان أسفا قال يا قوم ألم يعدكم ربكم وعدا حسنا أفطال عليكم العهد أم أردتم أن يحل عليكم غضب من ربكم فأخلفتم موعدي
So Moses returned to his people in a state of indignation and sorrow. He said: "O my people! did not your Lord make a handsome promise to you? Did then the promise seem to you long (in coming)? Or did ye desire that Wrath should descend from your Lord on you, and so ye broke your promise to me?"

قالوا ما أخلفنا موعدك بملكنا ولكنا حملنا أوزارا من زينة القوم فقذفناها فكذلك ألقى السامري
They said: "We broke not the promise to thee, as far as lay in our power: but we were made to carry the weight of the ornaments of the (whole) people, and we threw them (into the fire), and that was what the Samiri suggested.

فأخرج لهم عجلا جسدا له خوار فقالوا هذا إلهكم وإله موسى فنسي
"Then he brought out (of the fire) before the (people) the image of a calf: It seemed to low: so they said: This is your god, and the god of Moses, but (Moses) has forgotten!"

أفلا يرون ألا يرجع إليهم قولا ولا يملك لهم ضرا ولا نفعا
Could they not see that it could not return them a word (for answer), and that it had no power either to harm them or to do them good?

ولقد قال لهم هارون من قبل يا قوم إنما فتنتم به وإن ربكم الرحمن فاتبعوني وأطيعوا أمري
Aaron had already, before this said to them: "O my people! ye are being tested in this: for verily your Lord is (Allah) Most Gracious; so follow me and obey my command."

قالوا لن نبرح عليه عاكفين حتى يرجع إلينا موسى
They had said: "We will not abandon this cult, but we will devote ourselves to it until Moses returns to us."

قال يا هارون ما منعك إذ رأيتهم ضلوا
(Moses) said: "O Aaron! what kept thee back, when thou sawest them going wrong,

ألا تتبعن أفعصيت أمري
"From following me? Didst thou then disobey my order?"

قال يا ابن أم لا تأخذ بلحيتي ولا برأسي إني خشيت أن تقول فرقت بين بني إسرائيل ولم ترقب قولي
(Aaron) replied: "O son of my mother! Seize (me) not by my beard nor by (the hair of) my head! Truly I feared lest thou shouldst say, 'Thou has caused a division among the children of Israel, and thou didst not respect my word!'"

قال فما خطبك يا سامري
(Moses) said: "What then is thy case, O Samiri?"

قال بصرت بما لم يبصروا به فقبضت قبضة من أثر الرسول فنبذتها وكذلك سولت لي نفسي
He replied: "I saw what they saw not: so I took a handful (of dust) from the footprint of the Messenger, and threw it (into the calf): thus did my soul suggest to me."

قال فاذهب فإن لك في الحياة أن تقول لا مساس وإن لك موعدا لن تخلفه وانظر إلى إلهك الذي ظلت عليه عاكفا لنحرقنه ثم لننسفنه في اليم نسفا
(Moses) said: "Get thee gone! but thy (punishment) in this life will be that thou wilt say, 'touch me not'; and moreover (for a future penalty) thou hast a promise that will not fail: Now look at thy god, of whom thou hast become a devoted worshipper: We will certainly (melt) it in a blazing fire and scatter it broadcast in the sea!"

إنما إلهكم الله الذي لا إله إلا هو وسع كل شيء علما
But the god of you all is the One Allah: there is no god but He: all things He comprehends in His knowledge.

كذلك نقص عليك من أنباء ما قد سبق وقد آتيناك من لدنا ذكرا
Thus do We relate to thee some stories of what happened before: for We have sent thee a Message from Our own Presence.

من أعرض عنه فإنه يحمل يوم القيامة وزرا
If any do turn away therefrom, verily they will bear a burden on the Day of judgment;

خالدين فيه وساء لهم يوم القيامة حملا
They will abide in this (state): and grievous will the burden be to them on that Day,-

يوم ينفخ في الصور ونحشر المجرمين يومئذ زرقا
The Day when the Trumpet will be sounded: that Day, We shall gather the sinful, blear-eyed (with terror).

يتخافتون بينهم إن لبثتم إلا عشرا
In whispers will they consult each other: "Yet tarried not longer than ten (Days);

نحن أعلم بما يقولون إذ يقول أمثلهم طريقة إن لبثتم إلا يوما
We know best what they will say, when their leader most eminent in conduct will say: "Ye tarried not longer than a day!"

ويسألونك عن الجبال فقل ينسفها ربي نسفا
They ask thee concerning the Mountains: say, "My Lord will uproot them and scatter them as dust;

فيذرها قاعا صفصفا
"He will leave them as plains smooth and level;

لا ترى فيها عوجا ولا أمتا
"Nothing crooked or curved wilt thou see in their place."

يومئذ يتبعون الداعي لا عوج له وخشعت الأصوات للرحمن فلا تسمع إلا همسا
On that Day will they follow the Caller (straight): no crookedness (can they show) him: all sounds shall humble themselves in the Presence of (Allah) Most Gracious: nothing shalt thou hear but the tramp of their feet (as they march).

يومئذ لا تنفع الشفاعة إلا من أذن له الرحمن ورضي له قولا
On that Day shall no intercession avail except for those for whom permission has been granted by (Allah) Most Gracious and whose word is acceptable to Him.

يعلم ما بين أيديهم وما خلفهم ولا يحيطون به علما
He knows what (appears to His creatures as) before or after or behind them: but they shall not compass it with their knowledge.

وعنت الوجوه للحي القيوم وقد خاب من حمل ظلما
(All) faces shall be humbled before (Him) - the Living, the Self-Subsisting, Eternal: hopeless indeed will be the man that carries iniquity (on his back).

ومن يعمل من الصالحات وهو مؤمن فلا يخاف ظلما ولا هضما
But he who works deeds of righteousness, and has faith, will have no fear of harm nor of any curtailment (of what is his due).

وكذلك أنزلناه قرآنا عربيا وصرفنا فيه من الوعيد لعلهم يتقون أو يحدث لهم ذكرا
Thus have We sent this down - an arabic Qur'an - and explained therein in detail some of the warnings, in order that they may fear Allah, or that it may cause their remembrance (of Him).

فتعالى الله الملك الحق ولا تعجل بالقرآن من قبل أن يقضى إليك وحيه وقل رب زدني علما
High above all is Allah, the King, the Truth! Be not in haste with the Qur'an before its revelation to thee is completed, but say, "O my Lord! advance me in knowledge."

ولقد عهدنا إلى آدم من قبل فنسي ولم نجد له عزما
We had already, beforehand, taken the covenant of Adam, but he forgot: and We found on his part no firm resolve.

وإذ قلنا للملائكة اسجدوا لآدم فسجدوا إلا إبليس أبى
When We said to the angels, "Prostrate yourselves to Adam", they prostrated themselves, but not Iblis: he refused.

فقلنا يا آدم إن هذا عدو لك ولزوجك فلا يخرجنكما من الجنة فتشقى
Then We said: "O Adam! verily, this is an enemy to thee and thy wife: so let him not get you both out of the Garden, so that thou art landed in misery.

إن لك ألا تجوع فيها ولا تعرى
"There is therein (enough provision) for thee not to go hungry nor to go naked,

وأنك لا تظمأ فيها ولا تضحى
"Nor to suffer from thirst, nor from the sun's heat."

فوسوس إليه الشيطان قال يا آدم هل أدلك على شجرة الخلد وملك لا يبلى
But Satan whispered evil to him: he said, "O Adam! shall I lead thee to the Tree of Eternity and to a kingdom that never decays?"

فأكلا منها فبدت لهما سوآتهما وطفقا يخصفان عليهما من ورق الجنة وعصى آدم ربه فغوى
In the result, they both ate of the tree, and so their nakedness appeared to them: they began to sew together, for their covering, leaves from the Garden: thus did Adam disobey his Lord, and allow himself to be seduced.

ثم اجتباه ربه فتاب عليه وهدى
But his Lord chose him (for His Grace): He turned to him, and gave him Guidance.

قال اهبطا منها جميعا بعضكم لبعض عدو فإما يأتينكم مني هدى فمن اتبع هداي فلا يضل ولا يشقى
He said: "Get ye down, both of you,- all together, from the Garden, with enmity one to another: but if, as is sure, there comes to you Guidance from Me, whosoever follows My Guidance, will not lose his way, nor fall into misery.

ومن أعرض عن ذكري فإن له معيشة ضنكا ونحشره يوم القيامة أعمى
"But whosoever turns away from My Message, verily for him is a life narrowed down, and We shall raise him up blind on the Day of Judgment."

قال رب لم حشرتني أعمى وقد كنت بصيرا
He will say: "O my Lord! why hast Thou raised me up blind, while I had sight (before)?"

قال كذلك أتتك آياتنا فنسيتها وكذلك اليوم تنسى
(Allah) will say: "Thus didst Thou, when Our Signs came unto thee, disregard them: so wilt thou, this day, be disregarded."

وكذلك نجزي من أسرف ولم يؤمن بآيات ربه ولعذاب الآخرة أشد وأبقى
And thus do We recompense him who transgresses beyond bounds and believes not in the Signs of his Lord: and the Penalty of the Hereafter is far more grievous and more enduring.

أفلم يهد لهم كم أهلكنا قبلهم من القرون يمشون في مساكنهم إن في ذلك لآيات لأولي النهى
Is it not a warning to such men (to call to mind) how many generations before them We destroyed, in whose haunts they (now) move? Verily, in this are Signs for men endued with understanding.

ولولا كلمة سبقت من ربك لكان لزاما وأجل مسمى
Had it not been for a Word that went forth before from thy Lord, (their punishment) must necessarily have come; but there is a Term appointed (for respite).

فاصبر على ما يقولون وسبح بحمد ربك قبل طلوع الشمس وقبل غروبها ومن آناء الليل فسبح وأطراف النهار لعلك ترضى
Therefore be patient with what they say, and celebrate (constantly) the praises of thy Lord, before the rising of the sun, and before its setting; yea, celebrate them for part of the hours of the night, and at the sides of the day: that thou mayest have (spiritual) joy.

ولا تمدن عينيك إلى ما متعنا به أزواجا منهم زهرة الحياة الدنيا لنفتنهم فيه ورزق ربك خير وأبقى
Nor strain thine eyes in longing for the things We have given for enjoyment to parties of them, the splendour of the life of this world, through which We test them: but the provision of thy Lord is better and more enduring.

وأمر أهلك بالصلاة واصطبر عليها لا نسألك رزقا نحن نرزقك والعاقبة للتقوى
Enjoin prayer on thy people, and be constant therein. We ask thee not to provide sustenance: We provide it for thee. But the (fruit of) the Hereafter is for righteousness.

وقالوا لولا يأتينا بآية من ربه أولم تأتهم بينة ما في الصحف الأولى
They say: "Why does he not bring us a sign from his Lord?" Has not a Clear Sign come to them of all that was in the former Books of revelation?

ولو أنا أهلكناهم بعذاب من قبله لقالوا ربنا لولا أرسلت إلينا رسولا فنتبع آياتك من قبل أن نذل ونخزى
And if We had inflicted on them a penalty before this, they would have said: "Our Lord! If only Thou hadst sent us a messenger, we should certainly have followed Thy Signs before we were humbled and put to shame."

قل كل متربص فتربصوا فستعلمون من أصحاب الصراط السوي ومن اهتدى
Say: "Each one (of us) is waiting: wait ye, therefore, and soon shall ye know who it is that is on the straight and even way, and who it is that has received Guidance."

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم اقترب للناس حسابهم وهم في غفلة معرضون
Closer and closer to mankind comes their Reckoning: yet they heed not and they turn away.

ما يأتيهم من ذكر من ربهم محدث إلا استمعوه وهم يلعبون
Never comes (aught) to them of a renewed Message from their Lord, but they listen to it as in jest,-

لاهية قلوبهم وأسروا النجوى الذين ظلموا هل هذا إلا بشر مثلكم أفتأتون السحر وأنتم تبصرون
Their hearts toying as with trifles. The wrong-doers conceal their private counsels, (saying), "Is this (one) more than a man like yourselves? Will ye go to witchcraft with your eyes open?"

قال ربي يعلم القول في السماء والأرض وهو السميع العليم
Say: "My Lord knoweth (every) word (spoken) in the heavens and on earth: He is the One that heareth and knoweth (all things)."

بل قالوا أضغاث أحلام بل افتراه بل هو شاعر فليأتنا بآية كما أرسل الأولون
"Nay," they say, "(these are) medleys of dream! - Nay, He forged it! - Nay, He is (but) a poet! Let him then bring us a Sign like the ones that were sent to (Prophets) of old!"

ما آمنت قبلهم من قرية أهلكناها أفهم يؤمنون
(As to those) before them, not one of the populations which We destroyed believed: will these believe?

وما أرسلنا قبلك إلا رجالا نوحي إليهم فاسألوا أهل الذكر إن كنتم لا تعلمون
Before thee, also, the messengers We sent were but men, to whom We granted inspiration: If ye realise this not, ask of those who possess the Message.

وما جعلناهم جسدا لا يأكلون الطعام وما كانوا خالدين
Nor did We give them bodies that ate no food, nor were they exempt from death.

ثم صدقناهم الوعد فأنجيناهم ومن نشاء وأهلكنا المسرفين
In the end We fulfilled to them Our Promise, and We saved them and those whom We pleased, but We destroyed those who transgressed beyond bounds.

لقد أنزلنا إليكم كتابا فيه ذكركم أفلا تعقلون
We have revealed for you (O men!) a book in which is a Message for you: will ye not then understand?

وكم قصمنا من قرية كانت ظالمة وأنشأنا بعدها قوما آخرين
How many were the populations We utterly destroyed because of their iniquities, setting up in their places other peoples?

فلما أحسوا بأسنا إذا هم منها يركضون
Yet, when they felt Our Punishment (coming), behold, they (tried to) flee from it.

لا تركضوا وارجعوا إلى ما أترفتم فيه ومساكنكم لعلكم تسألون
Flee not, but return to the good things of this life which were given you, and to your homes in order that ye may be called to account.

قالوا يا ويلنا إنا كنا ظالمين
They said: "Ah! woe to us! We were indeed wrong-doers!"

فما زالت تلك دعواهم حتى جعلناهم حصيدا خامدين
And that cry of theirs ceased not, till We made them as a field that is mown, as ashes silent and quenched.

وما خلقنا السماء والأرض وما بينهما لاعبين
Not for (idle) sport did We create the heavens and the earth and all that is between!

لو أردنا أن نتخذ لهوا لاتخذناه من لدنا إن كنا فاعلين
If it had been Our wish to take (just) a pastime, We should surely have taken it from the things nearest to Us, if We would do (such a thing)!

بل نقذف بالحق على الباطل فيدمغه فإذا هو زاهق ولكم الويل مما تصفون
Nay, We hurl the Truth against falsehood, and it knocks out its brain, and behold, falsehood doth perish! Ah! woe be to you for the (false) things ye ascribe (to Us).

وله من في السماوات والأرض ومن عنده لا يستكبرون عن عبادته ولا يستحسرون
To Him belong all (creatures) in the heavens and on earth: Even those who are in His (very) Presence are not too proud to serve Him, nor are they (ever) weary (of His service):

يسبحون الليل والنهار لا يفترون
They celebrate His praises night and day, nor do they ever flag or intermit.

أم اتخذوا آلهة من الأرض هم ينشرون
Or have they taken (for worship) gods from the earth who can raise (the dead)?

لو كان فيهما آلهة إلا الله لفسدتا فسبحان الله رب العرش عما يصفون
If there were, in the heavens and the earth, other gods besides Allah, there would have been confusion in both! but glory to Allah, the Lord of the Throne: (High is He) above what they attribute to Him!

لا يسأل عما يفعل وهم يسألون
He cannot be questioned for His acts, but they will be questioned (for theirs).

أم اتخذوا من دونه آلهة قل هاتوا برهانكم هذا ذكر من معي وذكر من قبلي بل أكثرهم لا يعلمون الحق فهم معرضون
Or have they taken for worship (other) gods besides him? Say, "Bring your convincing proof: this is the Message of those with me and the Message of those before me." But most of them know not the Truth, and so turn away.

وما أرسلنا من قبلك من رسول إلا نوحي إليه أنه لا إله إلا أنا فاعبدون
Not a messenger did We send before thee without this inspiration sent by Us to him: that there is no god but I; therefore worship and serve Me.

وقالوا اتخذ الرحمن ولدا سبحانه بل عباد مكرمون
And they say: "(Allah) Most Gracious has begotten offspring." Glory to Him! they are (but) servants raised to honour.

لا يسبقونه بالقول وهم بأمره يعملون
They speak not before He speaks, and they act (in all things) by His Command.

يعلم ما بين أيديهم وما خلفهم ولا يشفعون إلا لمن ارتضى وهم من خشيته مشفقون
He knows what is before them, and what is behind them, and they offer no intercession except for those who are acceptable, and they stand in awe and reverence of His (Glory).

ومن يقل منهم إني إله من دونه فذلك نجزيه جهنم كذلك نجزي الظالمين
If any of them should say, "I am a god besides Him", such a one We should reward with Hell: thus do We reward those who do wrong.

أولم ير الذين كفروا أن السماوات والأرض كانتا رتقا ففتقناهما وجعلنا من الماء كل شيء حي أفلا يؤمنون
Do not the Unbelievers see that the heavens and the earth were joined together (as one unit of creation), before we clove them asunder? We made from water every living thing. Will they not then believe?

وجعلنا في الأرض رواسي أن تميد بهم وجعلنا فيها فجاجا سبلا لعلهم يهتدون
And We have set on the earth mountains standing firm, lest it should shake with them, and We have made therein broad highways (between mountains) for them to pass through: that they may receive Guidance.

وجعلنا السماء سقفا محفوظا وهم عن آياتها معرضون
And We have made the heavens as a canopy well guarded: yet do they turn away from the Signs which these things (point to)!

وهو الذي خلق الليل والنهار والشمس والقمر كل في فلك يسبحون
It is He Who created the Night and the Day, and the sun and the moon: all (the celestial bodies) swim along, each in its rounded course.

وما جعلنا لبشر من قبلك الخلد أفإن مت فهم الخالدون
We granted not to any man before thee permanent life (here): if then thou shouldst die, would they live permanently?

كل نفس ذائقة الموت ونبلوكم بالشر والخير فتنة وإلينا ترجعون
Every soul shall have a taste of death: and We test you by evil and by good by way of trial. to Us must ye return.

وإذا رآك الذين كفروا إن يتخذونك إلا هزوا أهذا الذي يذكر آلهتكم وهم بذكر الرحمن هم كافرون
When the Unbelievers see thee, they treat thee not except with ridicule. "Is this," (they say), "the one who talks of your gods?" and they blaspheme at the mention of (Allah) Most Gracious!

خلق الإنسان من عجل سأريكم آياتي فلا تستعجلون
Man is a creature of haste: soon (enough) will I show you My Signs; then ye will not ask Me to hasten them!

ويقولون متى هذا الوعد إن كنتم صادقين
They say: "When will this promise come to pass, if ye are telling the truth?"

لو يعلم الذين كفروا حين لا يكفون عن وجوههم النار ولا عن ظهورهم ولا هم ينصرون
If only the Unbelievers knew (the time) when they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces, nor yet from their backs, and (when) no help can reach them!

بل تأتيهم بغتة فتبهتهم فلا يستطيعون ردها ولا هم ينظرون
Nay, it may come to them all of a sudden and confound them: no power will they have then to avert it, nor will they (then) get respite.

ولقد استهزئ برسل من قبلك فحاق بالذين سخروا منهم ما كانوا به يستهزئون
Mocked were (many) messenger before thee; But their scoffers were hemmed in by the thing that they mocked.

قل من يكلؤكم بالليل والنهار من الرحمن بل هم عن ذكر ربهم معرضون
Say: "Who can keep you safe by night and by day from (the Wrath of) (Allah) Most Gracious?" Yet they turn away from the mention of their Lord.

أم لهم آلهة تمنعهم من دوننا لا يستطيعون نصر أنفسهم ولا هم منا يصحبون
Or have they gods that can guard them from Us? They have no power to aid themselves, nor can they be defended from Us.

بل متعنا هؤلاء وآباءهم حتى طال عليهم العمر أفلا يرون أنا نأتي الأرض ننقصها من أطرافها أفهم الغالبون
Nay, We gave the good things of this life to these men and their fathers until the period grew long for them; See they not that We gradually reduce the land (in their control) from its outlying borders? Is it then they who will win?

قل إنما أنذركم بالوحي ولا يسمع الصم الدعاء إذا ما ينذرون
Say, "I do but warn you according to revelation": But the deaf will not hear the call, (even) when they are warned!

ولئن مستهم نفحة من عذاب ربك ليقولن يا ويلنا إنا كنا ظالمين
If but a breath of the Wrath of thy Lord do touch them, they will then say, "Woe to us! we did wrong indeed!"

ونضع الموازين القسط ليوم القيامة فلا تظلم نفس شيئا وإن كان مثقال حبة من خردل أتينا بها وكفى بنا حاسبين
We shall set up scales of justice for the Day of Judgment, so that not a soul will be dealt with unjustly in the least, and if there be (no more than) the weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it (to account): and enough are We to take account.

ولقد آتينا موسى وهارون الفرقان وضياء وذكرا للمتقين
In the past We granted to Moses and Aaron the criterion (for judgment), and a Light and a Message for those who would do right,-

الذين يخشون ربهم بالغيب وهم من الساعة مشفقون
Those who fear their Lord in their most secret thoughts, and who hold the Hour (of Judgment) in awe.

وهذا ذكر مبارك أنزلناه أفأنتم له منكرون
And this is a blessed Message which We have sent down: will ye then reject it?

ولقد آتينا إبراهيم رشده من قبل وكنا به عالمين
We bestowed aforetime on Abraham his rectitude of conduct, and well were We acquainted with him.

إذ قال لأبيه وقومه ما هذه التماثيل التي أنتم لها عاكفون
Behold! he said to his father and his people, "What are these images, to which ye are (so assiduously) devoted?"

قالوا وجدنا آباءنا لها عابدين
They said, "We found our fathers worshipping them."

قال لقد كنتم أنتم وآباؤكم في ضلال مبين
He said, "Indeed ye have been in manifest error - ye and your fathers."

قالوا أجئتنا بالحق أم أنت من اللاعبين
They said, "Have you brought us the Truth, or are you one of those who jest?"

قال بل ربكم رب السماوات والأرض الذي فطرهن وأنا على ذلكم من الشاهدين
He said, "Nay, your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, He Who created them (from nothing): and I am a witness to this (Truth).

وتالله لأكيدن أصنامكم بعد أن تولوا مدبرين
"And by Allah, I have a plan for your idols - after ye go away and turn your backs"..

فجعلهم جذاذا إلا كبيرا لهم لعلهم إليه يرجعون
So he broke them to pieces, (all) but the biggest of them, that they might turn (and address themselves) to it.

قالوا من فعل هذا بآلهتنا إنه لمن الظالمين
They said, "Who has done this to our gods? He must indeed be some man of impiety!"

قالوا سمعنا فتى يذكرهم يقال له إبراهيم
They said, "We heard a youth talk of them: He is called Abraham."

قالوا فأتوا به على أعين الناس لعلهم يشهدون
They said, "Then bring him before the eyes of the people, that they may bear witness."

قالوا أأنت فعلت هذا بآلهتنا يا إبراهيم
They said, "Art thou the one that did this with our gods, O Abraham?"

قال بل فعله كبيرهم هذا فاسألوهم إن كانوا ينطقون
He said: "Nay, this was done by - this is their biggest one! ask them, if they can speak intelligently!"

فرجعوا إلى أنفسهم فقالوا إنكم أنتم الظالمون
So they turned to themselves and said, "Surely ye are the ones in the wrong!"

ثم نكسوا على رءوسهم لقد علمت ما هؤلاء ينطقون
Then were they confounded with shame: (they said), "Thou knowest full well that these (idols) do not speak!"

قال أفتعبدون من دون الله ما لا ينفعكم شيئا ولا يضركم
(Abraham) said, "Do ye then worship, besides Allah, things that can neither be of any good to you nor do you harm?

أف لكم ولما تعبدون من دون الله أفلا تعقلون
"Fie upon you, and upon the things that ye worship besides Allah! Have ye no sense?"..

قالوا حرقوه وانصروا آلهتكم إن كنتم فاعلين
They said, "Burn him and protect your gods, If ye do (anything at all)!"

قلنا يا نار كوني بردا وسلاما على إبراهيم
We said, "O Fire! be thou cool, and (a means of) safety for Abraham!"

وأرادوا به كيدا فجعلناهم الأخسرين
Then they sought a stratagem against him: but We made them the ones that lost most!

ونجيناه ولوطا إلى الأرض التي باركنا فيها للعالمين
But We delivered him and (his nephew) Lut (and directed them) to the land which We have blessed for the nations.

ووهبنا له إسحاق ويعقوب نافلة وكلا جعلنا صالحين
And We bestowed on him Isaac and, as an additional gift, (a grandson), Jacob, and We made righteous men of every one (of them).

وجعلناهم أئمة يهدون بأمرنا وأوحينا إليهم فعل الخيرات وإقام الصلاة وإيتاء الزكاة وكانوا لنا عابدين
And We made them leaders, guiding (men) by Our Command, and We sent them inspiration to do good deeds, to establish regular prayers, and to practise regular charity; and they constantly served Us (and Us only).

ولوطا آتيناه حكما وعلما ونجيناه من القرية التي كانت تعمل الخبائث إنهم كانوا قوم سوء فاسقين
And to Lut, too, We gave Judgment and Knowledge, and We saved him from the town which practised abominations: truly they were a people given to Evil, a rebellious people.

وأدخلناه في رحمتنا إنه من الصالحين
And We admitted him to Our Mercy: for he was one of the Righteous.

ونوحا إذ نادى من قبل فاستجبنا له فنجيناه وأهله من الكرب العظيم
(Remember) Noah, when he cried (to Us) aforetime: We listened to his (prayer) and delivered him and his family from great distress.

ونصرناه من القوم الذين كذبوا بآياتنا إنهم كانوا قوم سوء فأغرقناهم أجمعين
We helped him against people who rejected Our Signs: truly they were a people given to Evil: so We drowned them (in the Flood) all together.

وداوود وسليمان إذ يحكمان في الحرث إذ نفشت فيه غنم القوم وكنا لحكمهم شاهدين
And remember David and Solomon, when they gave judgment in the matter of the field into which the sheep of certain people had strayed by night: We did witness their judgment.

ففهمناها سليمان وكلا آتينا حكما وعلما وسخرنا مع داوود الجبال يسبحن والطير وكنا فاعلين
To Solomon We inspired the (right) understanding of the matter: to each (of them) We gave Judgment and Knowledge; it was Our power that made the hills and the birds celebrate Our praises, with David: it was We Who did (all these things).

وعلمناه صنعة لبوس لكم لتحصنكم من بأسكم فهل أنتم شاكرون
It was We Who taught him the making of coats of mail for your benefit, to guard you from each other's violence: will ye then be grateful?

ولسليمان الريح عاصفة تجري بأمره إلى الأرض التي باركنا فيها وكنا بكل شيء عالمين
(It was Our power that made) the violent (unruly) wind flow (tamely) for Solomon, to his order, to the land which We had blessed: for We do know all things.

ومن الشياطين من يغوصون له ويعملون عملا دون ذلك وكنا لهم حافظين
And of the evil ones, were some who dived for him, and did other work besides; and it was We Who guarded them.

وأيوب إذ نادى ربه أني مسني الضر وأنت أرحم الراحمين
And (remember) Job, when He cried to his Lord, "Truly distress has seized me, but Thou art the Most Merciful of those that are merciful."

فاستجبنا له فكشفنا ما به من ضر وآتيناه أهله ومثلهم معهم رحمة من عندنا وذكرى للعابدين
So We listened to him: We removed the distress that was on him, and We restored his people to him, and doubled their number,- as a Grace from Ourselves, and a thing for commemoration, for all who serve Us.

وإسماعيل وإدريس وذا الكفل كل من الصابرين
And (remember) Isma'il, Idris, and Zul-kifl, all (men) of constancy and patience;

وأدخلناهم في رحمتنا إنهم من الصالحين
We admitted them to Our mercy: for they were of the righteous ones.

وذا النون إذ ذهب مغاضبا فظن أن لن نقدر عليه فنادى في الظلمات أن لا إله إلا أنت سبحانك إني كنت من الظالمين
And remember Zun-nun, when he departed in wrath: He imagined that We had no power over him! But he cried through the deptHs of darkness, "There is no god but thou: glory to thee: I was indeed wrong!"

فاستجبنا له ونجيناه من الغم وكذلك ننجي المؤمنين
So We listened to him: and delivered him from distress: and thus do We deliver those who have faith.

وزكريا إذ نادى ربه رب لا تذرني فردا وأنت خير الوارثين
And (remember) Zakariya, when he cried to his Lord: "O my Lord! leave me not without offspring, though thou art the best of inheritors."

فاستجبنا له ووهبنا له يحيى وأصلحنا له زوجه إنهم كانوا يسارعون في الخيرات ويدعوننا رغبا ورهبا وكانوا لنا خاشعين
So We listened to him: and We granted him Yahya: We cured his wife's (Barrenness) for him. These (three) were ever quick in emulation in good works; they used to call on Us with love and reverence, and humble themselves before Us.

والتي أحصنت فرجها فنفخنا فيها من روحنا وجعلناها وابنها آية للعالمين
And (remember) her who guarded her chastity: We breathed into her of Our spirit, and We made her and her son a sign for all peoples.

إن هذه أمتكم أمة واحدة وأنا ربكم فاعبدون
Verily, this brotherhood of yours is a single brotherhood, and I am your Lord and Cherisher: therefore serve Me (and no other).

وتقطعوا أمرهم بينهم كل إلينا راجعون
But (later generations) cut off their affair (of unity), one from another: (yet) will they all return to Us.

فمن يعمل من الصالحات وهو مؤمن فلا كفران لسعيه وإنا له كاتبون
Whoever works any act of righteousness and has faith,- His endeavour will not be rejected: We shall record it in his favour.

وحرام على قرية أهلكناها أنهم لا يرجعون
But there is a ban on any population which We have destroyed: that they shall not return,

حتى إذا فتحت يأجوج ومأجوج وهم من كل حدب ينسلون
Until the Gog and Magog (people) are let through (their barrier), and they swiftly swarm from every hill.

واقترب الوعد الحق فإذا هي شاخصة أبصار الذين كفروا يا ويلنا قد كنا في غفلة من هذا بل كنا ظالمين
Then will the true promise draw nigh (of fulfilment): then behold! the eyes of the Unbelievers will fixedly stare in horror: "Ah! Woe to us! we were indeed heedless of this; nay, we truly did wrong!"

إنكم وما تعبدون من دون الله حصب جهنم أنتم لها واردون
Verily ye, (unbelievers), and the (false) gods that ye worship besides Allah, are (but) fuel for Hell! to it will ye (surely) come!

لو كان هؤلاء آلهة ما وردوها وكل فيها خالدون
If these had been gods, they would not have got there! but each one will abide therein.

لهم فيها زفير وهم فيها لا يسمعون
There, sobbing will be their lot, nor will they there hear (aught else).

إن الذين سبقت لهم منا الحسنى أولئك عنها مبعدون
Those for whom the good (record) from Us has gone before, will be removed far therefrom.

لا يسمعون حسيسها وهم في ما اشتهت أنفسهم خالدون
Not the slightest sound will they hear of Hell: what their souls desired, in that will they dwell.

لا يحزنهم الفزع الأكبر وتتلقاهم الملائكة هذا يومكم الذي كنتم توعدون
The Great Terror will bring them no grief: but the angels will meet them (with mutual greetings): "This is your Day,- (the Day) that ye were promised."

يوم نطوي السماء كطي السجل للكتب كما بدأنا أول خلق نعيده وعدا علينا إنا كنا فاعلين
The Day that We roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books (completed),- even as We produced the first creation, so shall We produce a new one: a promise We have undertaken: truly shall We fulfil it.

ولقد كتبنا في الزبور من بعد الذكر أن الأرض يرثها عبادي الصالحون
Before this We wrote in the Psalms, after the Message (given to Moses): My servants the righteous, shall inherit the earth."

إن في هذا لبلاغا لقوم عابدين
Verily in this (Qur'an) is a Message for people who would (truly) worship Allah.

وما أرسلناك إلا رحمة للعالمين
We sent thee not, but as a Mercy for all creatures.

قل إنما يوحى إلي أنما إلهكم إله واحد فهل أنتم مسلمون
Say: "What has come to me by inspiration is that your Allah is One Allah: will ye therefore bow to His Will (in Islam)?"

فإن تولوا فقل آذنتكم على سواء وإن أدري أقريب أم بعيد ما توعدون
But if they turn back, Say: "I have proclaimed the Message to you all alike and in truth; but I know not whether that which ye are promised is near or far.

إنه يعلم الجهر من القول ويعلم ما تكتمون
"It is He Who knows what is open in speech and what ye hide (in your hearts).

وإن أدري لعله فتنة لكم ومتاع إلى حين
"I know not but that it may be a trial for you, and a grant of (worldly) livelihood (to you) for a time."

قال رب احكم بالحق وربنا الرحمن المستعان على ما تصفون
Say: "O my Lord! judge Thou in truth!" "Our Lord Most Gracious is the One Whose assistance should be sought against the blasphemies ye utter!"

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم يا أيها الناس اتقوا ربكم إن زلزلة الساعة شيء عظيم
O mankind! fear your Lord! for the convulsion of the Hour (of Judgment) will be a thing terrible!

يوم ترونها تذهل كل مرضعة عما أرضعت وتضع كل ذات حمل حملها وترى الناس سكارى وما هم بسكارى ولكن عذاب الله شديد
The Day ye shall see it, every mother giving suck shall forget her suckling-babe, and every pregnant female shall drop her load (unformed): thou shalt see mankind as in a drunken riot, yet not drunk: but dreadful will be the Wrath of Allah.

ومن الناس من يجادل في الله بغير علم ويتبع كل شيطان مريد
And yet among men there are such as dispute about Allah, without knowledge, and follow every evil one obstinate in rebellion!

كتب عليه أنه من تولاه فأنه يضله ويهديه إلى عذاب السعير
About the (Evil One) it is decreed that whoever turns to him for friendship, him will he lead astray, and he will guide him to the Penalty of the Fire.

يا أيها الناس إن كنتم في ريب من البعث فإنا خلقناكم من تراب ثم من نطفة ثم من علقة ثم من مضغة مخلقة وغير مخلقة لنبين لكم ونقر في الأرحام ما نشاء إلى أجل مسمى ثم نخرجكم طفلا ثم لتبلغوا أشدكم ومنكم من يتوفى ومنكم من يرد إلى أرذل العمر لكيلا يعلم من بعد علم شيئا وترى الأرض هامدة فإذا أنزلنا عليها الماء اهتزت وربت وأنبتت من كل زوج بهيج
O mankind! if ye have a doubt about the Resurrection, (consider) that We created you out of dust, then out of sperm, then out of a leech-like clot, then out of a morsel of flesh, partly formed and partly unformed, in order that We may manifest (our power) to you; and We cause whom We will to rest in the wombs for an appointed term, then do We bring you out as babes, then (foster you) that ye may reach your age of full strength; and some of you are called to die, and some are sent back to the feeblest old age, so that they know nothing after having known (much), and (further), thou seest the earth barren and lifeless, but when We pour down rain on it, it is stirred (to life), it swells, and it puts forth every kind of beautiful growth (in pairs).

ذلك بأن الله هو الحق وأنه يحيي الموتى وأنه على كل شيء قدير
This is so, because Allah is the Reality: it is He Who gives life to the dead, and it is He Who has power over all things.

وأن الساعة آتية لا ريب فيها وأن الله يبعث من في القبور
And verily the Hour will come: there can be no doubt about it, or about (the fact) that Allah will raise up all who are in the graves.

ومن الناس من يجادل في الله بغير علم ولا هدى ولا كتاب منير
Yet there is among men such a one as disputes about Allah, without Knowledge, without Guidance, and without a Book of Enlightenment,-

ثاني عطفه ليضل عن سبيل الله له في الدنيا خزي ونذيقه يوم القيامة عذاب الحريق
(Disdainfully) bending his side, in order to lead (men) astray from the Path of Allah: for him there is disgrace in this life, and on the Day of Judgment We shall make him taste the Penalty of burning (Fire).

ذلك بما قدمت يداك وأن الله ليس بظلام للعبيد
(It will be said): "This is because of the deeds which thy hands sent forth, for verily Allah is not unjust to His servants.

ومن الناس من يعبد الله على حرف فإن أصابه خير اطمأن به وإن أصابته فتنة انقلب على وجهه خسر الدنيا والآخرة ذلك هو الخسران المبين
There are among men some who serve Allah, as it were, on the verge: if good befalls them, they are, therewith, well content; but if a trial comes to them, they turn on their faces: they lose both this world and the Hereafter: that is loss for all to see!

يدعو من دون الله ما لا يضره وما لا ينفعه ذلك هو الضلال البعيد
They call on such deities, besides Allah, as can neither hurt nor profit them: that is straying far indeed (from the Way)!

يدعو لمن ضره أقرب من نفعه لبئس المولى ولبئس العشير
(Perhaps) they call on one whose hurt is nearer than his profit: evil, indeed, is the patron, and evil the companion (or help)!

إن الله يدخل الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار إن الله يفعل ما يريد
Verily Allah will admit those who believe and work righteous deeds, to Gardens, beneath which rivers flow: for Allah carries out all that He plans.

من كان يظن أن لن ينصره الله في الدنيا والآخرة فليمدد بسبب إلى السماء ثم ليقطع فلينظر هل يذهبن كيده ما يغيظ
If any think that Allah will not help him (His Messenger) in this world and the Hereafter, let him stretch out a rope to the ceiling and cut (himself) off: then let him see whether his plan will remove that which enrages (him)!

وكذلك أنزلناه آيات بينات وأن الله يهدي من يريد
Thus have We sent down Clear Signs; and verily Allah doth guide whom He will!

إن الذين آمنوا والذين هادوا والصابئين والنصارى والمجوس والذين أشركوا إن الله يفصل بينهم يوم القيامة إن الله على كل شيء شهيد
Those who believe (in the Qur'an), those who follow the Jewish (scriptures), and the Sabians, Christians, Magians, and Polytheists,- Allah will judge between them on the Day of Judgment: for Allah is witness of all things.

ألم تر أن الله يسجد له من في السماوات ومن في الأرض والشمس والقمر والنجوم والجبال والشجر والدواب وكثير من الناس وكثير حق عليه العذاب ومن يهن الله فما له من مكرم إن الله يفعل ما يشاء
Seest thou not that to Allah bow down in worship all things that are in the heavens and on earth,- the sun, the moon, the stars; the hills, the trees, the animals; and a great number among mankind? But a great number are (also) such as are fit for Punishment: and such as Allah shall disgrace,- None can raise to honour: for Allah carries out all that He wills.

هذان خصمان اختصموا في ربهم فالذين كفروا قطعت لهم ثياب من نار يصب من فوق رءوسهم الحميم
These two antagonists dispute with each other about their Lord: But those who deny (their Lord),- for them will be cut out a garment of Fire: over their heads will be poured out boiling water.

يصهر به ما في بطونهم والجلود
With it will be scalded what is within their bodies, as well as (their) skins.

ولهم مقامع من حديد
In addition there will be maces of iron (to punish) them.

كلما أرادوا أن يخرجوا منها من غم أعيدوا فيها وذوقوا عذاب الحريق
Every time they wish to get away therefrom, from anguish, they will be forced back therein, and (it will be said), "Taste ye the Penalty of Burning!"

إن الله يدخل الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار يحلون فيها من أساور من ذهب ولؤلؤا ولباسهم فيها حرير
Allah will admit those who believe and work righteous deeds, to Gardens beneath which rivers flow: they shall be adorned therein with bracelets of gold and pearls; and their garments there will be of silk.

وهدوا إلى الطيب من القول وهدوا إلى صراط الحميد
For they have been guided (in this life) to the purest of speeches; they have been guided to the Path of Him Who is Worthy of (all) Praise.

إن الذين كفروا ويصدون عن سبيل الله والمسجد الحرام الذي جعلناه للناس سواء العاكف فيه والباد ومن يرد فيه بإلحاد بظلم نذقه من عذاب أليم
As to those who have rejected (Allah), and would keep back (men) from the Way of Allah, and from the Sacred Mosque, which We have made (open) to (all) men - equal is the dweller there and the visitor from the country - and any whose purpose therein is profanity or wrong-doing - them will We cause to taste of a most Grievous Penalty.

وإذ بوأنا لإبراهيم مكان البيت أن لا تشرك بي شيئا وطهر بيتي للطائفين والقائمين والركع السجود
Behold! We gave the site, to Abraham, of the (Sacred) House, (saying): "Associate not anything (in worship) with Me; and sanctify My House for those who compass it round, or stand up, or bow, or prostrate themselves (therein in prayer).

وأذن في الناس بالحج يأتوك رجالا وعلى كل ضامر يأتين من كل فج عميق
"And proclaim the Pilgrimage among men: they will come to thee on foot and (mounted) on every kind of camel, lean on account of journeys through deep and distant mountain highways;

ليشهدوا منافع لهم ويذكروا اسم الله في أيام معلومات على ما رزقهم من بهيمة الأنعام فكلوا منها وأطعموا البائس الفقير
"That they may witness the benefits (provided) for them, and celebrate the name of Allah, through the Days appointed, over the cattle which He has provided for them (for sacrifice): then eat ye thereof and feed the distressed ones in want.

ثم ليقضوا تفثهم وليوفوا نذورهم وليطوفوا بالبيت العتيق
"Then let them complete the rites prescribed for them, perform their vows, and (again) circumambulate the Ancient House."

ذلك ومن يعظم حرمات الله فهو خير له عند ربه وأحلت لكم الأنعام إلا ما يتلى عليكم فاجتنبوا الرجس من الأوثان واجتنبوا قول الزور
Such (is the Pilgrimage): whoever honours the sacred rites of Allah, for him it is good in the Sight of his Lord. Lawful to you (for food in Pilgrimage) are cattle, except those mentioned to you (as exception): but shun the abomination of idols, and shun the word that is false,-

حنفاء لله غير مشركين به ومن يشرك بالله فكأنما خر من السماء فتخطفه الطير أو تهوي به الريح في مكان سحيق
Being true in faith to Allah, and never assigning partners to Him: if anyone assigns partners to Allah, is as if he had fallen from heaven and been snatched up by birds, or the wind had swooped (like a bird on its prey) and thrown him into a far-distant place.

ذلك ومن يعظم شعائر الله فإنها من تقوى القلوب
Such (is his state): and whoever holds in honour the symbols of Allah, (in the sacrifice of animals), such (honour) should come truly from piety of heart.

لكم فيها منافع إلى أجل مسمى ثم محلها إلى البيت العتيق
In them ye have benefits for a term appointed: in the end their place of sacrifice is near the Ancient House.

ولكل أمة جعلنا منسكا ليذكروا اسم الله على ما رزقهم من بهيمة الأنعام فإلهكم إله واحد فله أسلموا وبشر المخبتين
To every people did We appoint rites (of sacrifice), that they might celebrate the name of Allah over the sustenance He gave them from animals (fit for food). But your god is One God: submit then your wills to Him (in Islam): and give thou the good news to those who humble themselves,-

الذين إذا ذكر الله وجلت قلوبهم والصابرين على ما أصابهم والمقيمي الصلاة ومما رزقناهم ينفقون
To those whose hearts when Allah is mentioned, are filled with fear, who show patient perseverance over their afflictions, keep up regular prayer, and spend (in charity) out of what We have bestowed upon them.

والبدن جعلناها لكم من شعائر الله لكم فيها خير فاذكروا اسم الله عليها صواف فإذا وجبت جنوبها فكلوا منها وأطعموا القانع والمعتر كذلك سخرناها لكم لعلكم تشكرون
The sacrificial camels we have made for you as among the symbols from Allah: in them is (much) good for you: then pronounce the name of Allah over them as they line up (for sacrifice): when they are down on their sides (after slaughter), eat ye thereof, and feed such as (beg not but) live in contentment, and such as beg with due humility: thus have We made animals subject to you, that ye may be grateful.

لن ينال الله لحومها ولا دماؤها ولكن يناله التقوى منكم كذلك سخرها لكم لتكبروا الله على ما هداكم وبشر المحسنين
It is not their meat nor their blood, that reaches Allah: it is your piety that reaches Him: He has thus made them subject to you, that ye may glorify Allah for His Guidance to you and proclaim the good news to all who do right.

إن الله يدافع عن الذين آمنوا إن الله لا يحب كل خوان كفور
Verily Allah will defend (from ill) those who believe: verily, Allah loveth not any that is a traitor to faith, or show ingratitude.

أذن للذين يقاتلون بأنهم ظلموا وإن الله على نصرهم لقدير
To those against whom war is made, permission is given (to fight), because they are wronged;- and verily, Allah is most powerful for their aid;-

الذين أخرجوا من ديارهم بغير حق إلا أن يقولوا ربنا الله ولولا دفع الله الناس بعضهم ببعض لهدمت صوامع وبيع وصلوات ومساجد يذكر فيها اسم الله كثيرا ولينصرن الله من ينصره إن الله لقوي عزيز
(They are) those who have been expelled from their homes in defiance of right,- (for no cause) except that they say, "our Lord is Allah". Did not Allah check one set of people by means of another, there would surely have been pulled down monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques, in which the name of Allah is commemorated in abundant measure. Allah will certainly aid those who aid his (cause);- for verily Allah is full of Strength, Exalted in Might, (able to enforce His Will).

الذين إن مكناهم في الأرض أقاموا الصلاة وآتوا الزكاة وأمروا بالمعروف ونهوا عن المنكر ولله عاقبة الأمور
(They are) those who, if We establish them in the land, establish regular prayer and give regular charity, enjoin the right and forbid wrong: with Allah rests the end (and decision) of (all) affairs.

وإن يكذبوك فقد كذبت قبلهم قوم نوح وعاد وثمود
If they treat thy (mission) as false, so did the peoples before them (with their prophets),- the People of Noah, and 'Ad and Thamud;

وقوم إبراهيم وقوم لوط
Those of Abraham and Lut;

وأصحاب مدين وكذب موسى فأمليت للكافرين ثم أخذتهم فكيف كان نكير
And the Companions of the Madyan People; and Moses was rejected (in the same way). But I granted respite to the Unbelievers, and (only) after that did I punish them: but how (terrible) was my rejection (of them)!

فكأين من قرية أهلكناها وهي ظالمة فهي خاوية على عروشها وبئر معطلة وقصر مشيد
How many populations have We destroyed, which were given to wrong-doing? They tumbled down on their roofs. And how many wells are lying idle and neglected, and castles lofty and well-built?

أفلم يسيروا في الأرض فتكون لهم قلوب يعقلون بها أو آذان يسمعون بها فإنها لا تعمى الأبصار ولكن تعمى القلوب التي في الصدور
Do they not travel through the land, so that their hearts (and minds) may thus learn wisdom and their ears may thus learn to hear? Truly it is not their eyes that are blind, but their hearts which are in their breasts.

ويستعجلونك بالعذاب ولن يخلف الله وعده وإن يوما عند ربك كألف سنة مما تعدون
Yet they ask thee to hasten on the Punishment! But Allah will not fail in His Promise. Verily a Day in the sight of thy Lord is like a thousand years of your reckoning.

وكأين من قرية أمليت لها وهي ظالمة ثم أخذتها وإلي المصير
And to how many populations did I give respite, which were given to wrong-doing? in the end I punished them. To me is the destination (of all).

قل يا أيها الناس إنما أنا لكم نذير مبين
Say: "O men! I am (sent) to you only to give a Clear Warning:

فالذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات لهم مغفرة ورزق كريم
"Those who believe and work righteousness, for them is forgiveness and a sustenance most generous.

والذين سعوا في آياتنا معاجزين أولئك أصحاب الجحيم
"But those who strive against Our Signs, to frustrate them,- they will be Companions of the Fire."

وما أرسلنا من قبلك من رسول ولا نبي إلا إذا تمنى ألقى الشيطان في أمنيته فينسخ الله ما يلقي الشيطان ثم يحكم الله آياته والله عليم حكيم
Never did We send a messenger or a prophet before thee, but, when he framed a desire, Satan threw some (vanity) into his desire: but Allah will cancel anything (vain) that Satan throws in, and Allah will confirm (and establish) His Signs: for Allah is full of Knowledge and Wisdom:

ليجعل ما يلقي الشيطان فتنة للذين في قلوبهم مرض والقاسية قلوبهم وإن الظالمين لفي شقاق بعيد
That He may make the suggestions thrown in by Satan, but a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease and who are hardened of heart: verily the wrong-doers are in a schism far (from the Truth):

وليعلم الذين أوتوا العلم أنه الحق من ربك فيؤمنوا به فتخبت له قلوبهم وإن الله لهاد الذين آمنوا إلى صراط مستقيم
And that those on whom knowledge has been bestowed may learn that the (Qur'an) is the Truth from thy Lord, and that they may believe therein, and their hearts may be made humbly (open) to it: for verily Allah is the Guide of those who believe, to the Straight Way.

ولا يزال الذين كفروا في مرية منه حتى تأتيهم الساعة بغتة أو يأتيهم عذاب يوم عقيم
Those who reject Faith will not cease to be in doubt concerning (Revelation) until the Hour (of Judgment) comes suddenly upon them, or there comes to them the Penalty of a Day of Disaster.

الملك يومئذ لله يحكم بينهم فالذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات في جنات النعيم
On that Day of Dominion will be that of Allah: He will judge between them: so those who believe and work righteous deeds will be in Gardens of Delight.

والذين كفروا وكذبوا بآياتنا فأولئك لهم عذاب مهين
And for those who reject Faith and deny our Signs, there will be a humiliating Punishment.

والذين هاجروا في سبيل الله ثم قتلوا أو ماتوا ليرزقنهم الله رزقا حسنا وإن الله لهو خير الرازقين
Those who leave their homes in the cause of Allah, and are then slain or die,- On them will Allah bestow verily a goodly Provision: Truly Allah is He Who bestows the best provision.

ليدخلنهم مدخلا يرضونه وإن الله لعليم حليم
Verily He will admit them to a place with which they shall be well pleased: for Allah is All-Knowing, Most Forbearing.

ذلك ومن عاقب بمثل ما عوقب به ثم بغي عليه لينصرنه الله إن الله لعفو غفور
That (is so). And if one has retaliated to no greater extent than the injury he received, and is again set upon inordinately, Allah will help him: for Allah is One that blots out (sins) and forgives (again and again).

ذلك بأن الله يولج الليل في النهار ويولج النهار في الليل وأن الله سميع بصير
That is because Allah merges night into day, and He merges day into night, and verily it is Allah Who hears and sees (all things).

ذلك بأن الله هو الحق وأن ما يدعون من دونه هو الباطل وأن الله هو العلي الكبير
That is because Allah - He is the Reality; and those besides Him whom they invoke,- they are but vain Falsehood: verily Allah is He, Most High, Most Great.

ألم تر أن الله أنزل من السماء ماء فتصبح الأرض مخضرة إن الله لطيف خبير
Seest thou not that Allah sends down rain from the sky, and forthwith the earth becomes clothed with green? for Allah is He Who understands the finest mysteries, and is well-acquainted (with them).

له ما في السماوات وما في الأرض وإن الله لهو الغني الحميد
To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth: for verily Allah,- He is free of all wants, Worthy of all Praise.

ألم تر أن الله سخر لكم ما في الأرض والفلك تجري في البحر بأمره ويمسك السماء أن تقع على الأرض إلا بإذنه إن الله بالناس لرءوف رحيم
Seest thou not that Allah has made subject to you (men) all that is on the earth, and the ships that sail through the sea by His Command? He withholds the sky (rain) from failing on the earth except by His leave: for Allah is Most Kind and Most Merciful to man.

وهو الذي أحياكم ثم يميتكم ثم يحييكم إن الإنسان لكفور
It is He Who gave you life, will cause you to die, and will again give you life: Truly man is a most ungrateful creature!

لكل أمة جعلنا منسكا هم ناسكوه فلا ينازعنك في الأمر وادع إلى ربك إنك لعلى هدى مستقيم
To every People have We appointed rites and ceremonies which they must follow: let them not then dispute with thee on the matter, but do thou invite (them) to thy Lord: for thou art assuredly on the Right Way.

وإن جادلوك فقل الله أعلم بما تعملون
If they do wrangle with thee, say, "Allah knows best what it is ye are doing."

الله يحكم بينكم يوم القيامة فيما كنتم فيه تختلفون
"Allah will judge between you on the Day of Judgment concerning the matters in which ye differ."

ألم تعلم أن الله يعلم ما في السماء والأرض إن ذلك في كتاب إن ذلك على الله يسير
Knowest thou not that Allah knows all that is in heaven and on earth? Indeed it is all in a Record, and that is easy for Allah.

ويعبدون من دون الله ما لم ينزل به سلطانا وما ليس لهم به علم وما للظالمين من نصير
Yet they worship, besides Allah, things for which no authority has been sent down to them, and of which they have (really) no knowledge: for those that do wrong there is no helper.

وإذا تتلى عليهم آياتنا بينات تعرف في وجوه الذين كفروا المنكر يكادون يسطون بالذين يتلون عليهم آياتنا قل أفأنبئكم بشر من ذلكم النار وعدها الله الذين كفروا وبئس المصير
When Our Clear Signs are rehearsed to them, thou wilt notice a denial on the faces of the Unbelievers! they nearly attack with violence those who rehearse Our Signs to them. Say, "Shall I tell you of something (far) worse than these Signs? It is the Fire (of Hell)! Allah has promised it to the Unbelievers! and evil is that destination!"

يا أيها الناس ضرب مثل فاستمعوا له إن الذين تدعون من دون الله لن يخلقوا ذبابا ولو اجتمعوا له وإن يسلبهم الذباب شيئا لا يستنقذوه منه ضعف الطالب والمطلوب
O men! Here is a parable set forth! listen to it! Those on whom, besides Allah, ye call, cannot create (even) a fly, if they all met together for the purpose! and if the fly should snatch away anything from them, they would have no power to release it from the fly. Feeble are those who petition and those whom they petition!

ما قدروا الله حق قدره إن الله لقوي عزيز
No just estimate have they made of Allah: for Allah is He Who is strong and able to Carry out His Will.

الله يصطفي من الملائكة رسلا ومن الناس إن الله سميع بصير
Allah chooses messengers from angels and from men for Allah is He Who hears and sees (all things).

يعلم ما بين أيديهم وما خلفهم وإلى الله ترجع الأمور
He knows what is before them and what is behind them: and to Allah go back all questions (for decision).

يا أيها الذين آمنوا اركعوا واسجدوا واعبدوا ربكم وافعلوا الخير لعلكم تفلحون
O ye who believe! bow down, prostrate yourselves, and adore your Lord; and do good; that ye may prosper.

وجاهدوا في الله حق جهاده هو اجتباكم وما جعل عليكم في الدين من حرج ملة أبيكم إبراهيم هو سماكم المسلمين من قبل وفي هذا ليكون الرسول شهيدا عليكم وتكونوا شهداء على الناس فأقيموا الصلاة وآتوا الزكاة واعتصموا بالله هو مولاكم فنعم المولى ونعم النصير
And strive in His cause as ye ought to strive, (with sincerity and under discipline). He has chosen you, and has imposed no difficulties on you in religion; it is the cult of your father Abraham. It is He Who has named you Muslims, both before and in this (Revelation); that the Messenger may be a witness for you, and ye be witnesses for mankind! So establish regular Prayer, give regular Charity, and hold fast to Allah! He is your Protector - the Best to protect and the Best to help!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم قد أفلح المؤمنون
The believers must (eventually) win through,-

الذين هم في صلاتهم خاشعون
Those who humble themselves in their prayers;

والذين هم عن اللغو معرضون
Who avoid vain talk;

والذين هم للزكاة فاعلون
Who are active in deeds of charity;

والذين هم لفروجهم حافظون
Who abstain from sex,

إلا على أزواجهم أو ما ملكت أيمانهم فإنهم غير ملومين
Except with those joined to them in the marriage bond, or (the captives) whom their right hands possess,- for (in their case) they are free from blame,

فمن ابتغى وراء ذلك فأولئك هم العادون
But those whose desires exceed those limits are transgressors;-

والذين هم لأماناتهم وعهدهم راعون
Those who faithfully observe their trusts and their covenants;

والذين هم على صلواتهم يحافظون
And who (strictly) guard their prayers;-

أولئك هم الوارثون
These will be the heirs,

الذين يرثون الفردوس هم فيها خالدون
Who will inherit Paradise: they will dwell therein (for ever).

ولقد خلقنا الإنسان من سلالة من طين
Man We did create from a quintessence (of clay);

ثم جعلناه نطفة في قرار مكين
Then We placed him as (a drop of) sperm in a place of rest, firmly fixed;

ثم خلقنا النطفة علقة فخلقنا العلقة مضغة فخلقنا المضغة عظاما فكسونا العظام لحما ثم أنشأناه خلقا آخر فتبارك الله أحسن الخالقين
Then We made the sperm into a clot of congealed blood; then of that clot We made a (foetus) lump; then we made out of that lump bones and clothed the bones with flesh; then we developed out of it another creature. So blessed be Allah, the best to create!

ثم إنكم بعد ذلك لميتون
After that, at length ye will die

ثم إنكم يوم القيامة تبعثون
Again, on the Day of Judgment, will ye be raised up.

ولقد خلقنا فوقكم سبع طرائق وما كنا عن الخلق غافلين
And We have made, above you, seven tracts; and We are never unmindful of (our) Creation.

وأنزلنا من السماء ماء بقدر فأسكناه في الأرض وإنا على ذهاب به لقادرون
And We send down water from the sky according to (due) measure, and We cause it to soak in the soil; and We certainly are able to drain it off (with ease).

فأنشأنا لكم به جنات من نخيل وأعناب لكم فيها فواكه كثيرة ومنها تأكلون
With it We grow for you gardens of date-palms and vines: in them have ye abundant fruits: and of them ye eat (and have enjoyment),-

وشجرة تخرج من طور سيناء تنبت بالدهن وصبغ للآكلين
Also a tree springing out of Mount Sinai, which produces oil, and relish for those who use it for food.

وإن لكم في الأنعام لعبرة نسقيكم مما في بطونها ولكم فيها منافع كثيرة ومنها تأكلون
And in cattle (too) ye have an instructive example: from within their bodies We produce (milk) for you to drink; there are, in them, (besides), numerous (other) benefits for you; and of their (meat) ye eat;

وعليها وعلى الفلك تحملون
And on them, as well as in ships, ye ride.

ولقد أرسلنا نوحا إلى قومه فقال يا قوم اعبدوا الله ما لكم من إله غيره أفلا تتقون
(Further, We sent a long line of prophets for your instruction). We sent Noah to his people: He said, "O my people! worship Allah! Ye have no other god but Him. Will ye not fear (Him)?"

فقال الملأ الذين كفروا من قومه ما هذا إلا بشر مثلكم يريد أن يتفضل عليكم ولو شاء الله لأنزل ملائكة ما سمعنا بهذا في آبائنا الأولين
The chiefs of the Unbelievers among his people said: "He is no more than a man like yourselves: his wish is to assert his superiority over you: if Allah had wished (to send messengers), He could have sent down angels; never did we hear such a thing (as he says), among our ancestors of old."

إن هو إلا رجل به جنة فتربصوا به حتى حين
(And some said): "He is only a man possessed: wait (and have patience) with him for a time."

قال رب انصرني بما كذبون
(Noah) said: "O my Lord! help me: for that they accuse me of falsehood!"

فأوحينا إليه أن اصنع الفلك بأعيننا ووحينا فإذا جاء أمرنا وفار التنور فاسلك فيها من كل زوجين اثنين وأهلك إلا من سبق عليه القول منهم ولا تخاطبني في الذين ظلموا إنهم مغرقون
So We inspired him (with this message): "Construct the Ark within Our sight and under Our guidance: then when comes Our Command, and the fountains of the earth gush forth, take thou on board pairs of every species, male and female, and thy family- except those of them against whom the Word has already gone forth: And address Me not in favour of the wrong-doers; for they shall be drowned (in the Flood).

فإذا استويت أنت ومن معك على الفلك فقل الحمد لله الذي نجانا من القوم الظالمين
And when thou hast embarked on the Ark - thou and those with thee,- say: "Praise be to Allah, Who has saved us from the people who do wrong."

وقل رب أنزلني منزلا مباركا وأنت خير المنزلين
And say: "O my Lord! enable me to disembark with thy blessing: for Thou art the Best to enable (us) to disembark."

إن في ذلك لآيات وإن كنا لمبتلين
Verily in this there are Signs (for men to understand); (thus) do We try (men).

ثم أنشأنا من بعدهم قرنا آخرين
Then We raised after them another generation.

فأرسلنا فيهم رسولا منهم أن اعبدوا الله ما لكم من إله غيره أفلا تتقون
And We sent to them a messenger from among themselves, (saying), "Worship Allah! ye have no other god but Him. Will ye not fear (Him)?"

وقال الملأ من قومه الذين كفروا وكذبوا بلقاء الآخرة وأترفناهم في الحياة الدنيا ما هذا إلا بشر مثلكم يأكل مما تأكلون منه ويشرب مما تشربون
And the chiefs of his people, who disbelieved and denied the Meeting in the Hereafter, and on whom We had bestowed the good things of this life, said: "He is no more than a man like yourselves: he eats of that of which ye eat, and drinks of what ye drink.

ولئن أطعتم بشرا مثلكم إنكم إذا لخاسرون
"If ye obey a man like yourselves, behold, it is certain ye will be lost.

أيعدكم أنكم إذا متم وكنتم ترابا وعظاما أنكم مخرجون
"Does he promise that when ye die and become dust and bones, ye shall be brought forth (again)?

هيهات هيهات لما توعدون
"Far, very far is that which ye are promised!

إن هي إلا حياتنا الدنيا نموت ونحيا وما نحن بمبعوثين
"There is nothing but our life in this world! We shall die and we live! But we shall never be raised up again!

إن هو إلا رجل افترى على الله كذبا وما نحن له بمؤمنين
"He is only a man who invents a lie against Allah, but we are not the ones to believe in him!"

قال رب انصرني بما كذبون
(The prophet) said: "O my Lord! help me: for that they accuse me of falsehood."

قال عما قليل ليصبحن نادمين
(Allah) said: "In but a little while, they are sure to be sorry!"

فأخذتهم الصيحة بالحق فجعلناهم غثاء فبعدا للقوم الظالمين
Then the Blast overtook them with justice, and We made them as rubbish of dead leaves (floating on the stream of Time)! So away with the people who do wrong!

ثم أنشأنا من بعدهم قرونا آخرين
Then We raised after them other generations.

ما تسبق من أمة أجلها وما يستأخرون
No people can hasten their term, nor can they delay (it).

ثم أرسلنا رسلنا تترى كل ما جاء أمة رسولها كذبوه فأتبعنا بعضهم بعضا وجعلناهم أحاديث فبعدا لقوم لا يؤمنون
Then sent We our messengers in succession: every time there came to a people their messenger, they accused him of falsehood: so We made them follow each other (in punishment): We made them as a tale (that is told): So away with a people that will not believe!

ثم أرسلنا موسى وأخاه هارون بآياتنا وسلطان مبين
Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron, with Our Signs and authority manifest,

إلى فرعون وملئه فاستكبروا وكانوا قوما عالين
To Pharaoh and his Chiefs: But these behaved insolently: they were an arrogant people.

فقالوا أنؤمن لبشرين مثلنا وقومهما لنا عابدون
They said: "Shall we believe in two men like ourselves? And their people are subject to us!"

فكذبوهما فكانوا من المهلكين
So they accused them of falsehood, and they became of those who were destroyed.

ولقد آتينا موسى الكتاب لعلهم يهتدون
And We gave Moses the Book, in order that they might receive guidance.

وجعلنا ابن مريم وأمه آية وآويناهما إلى ربوة ذات قرار ومعين
And We made the son of Mary and his mother as a Sign: We gave them both shelter on high ground, affording rest and security and furnished with springs.

يا أيها الرسل كلوا من الطيبات واعملوا صالحا إني بما تعملون عليم
O ye messengers! enjoy (all) things good and pure, and work righteousness: for I am well-acquainted with (all) that ye do.

وإن هذه أمتكم أمة واحدة وأنا ربكم فاتقون
And verily this Brotherhood of yours is a single Brotherhood, and I am your Lord and Cherisher: therefore fear Me (and no other).

فتقطعوا أمرهم بينهم زبرا كل حزب بما لديهم فرحون
But people have cut off their affair (of unity), between them, into sects: each party rejoices in that which is with itself.

فذرهم في غمرتهم حتى حين
But leave them in their confused ignorance for a time.

أيحسبون أنما نمدهم به من مال وبنين
Do they think that because We have granted them abundance of wealth and sons,

نسارع لهم في الخيرات بل لا يشعرون
We would hasten them on in every good? Nay, they do not understand.

إن الذين هم من خشية ربهم مشفقون
Verily those who live in awe for fear of their Lord;

والذين هم بآيات ربهم يؤمنون
Those who believe in the Signs of their Lord;

والذين هم بربهم لا يشركون
Those who join not (in worship) partners with their Lord;

والذين يؤتون ما آتوا وقلوبهم وجلة أنهم إلى ربهم راجعون
And those who dispense their charity with their hearts full of fear, because they will return to their Lord;-

أولئك يسارعون في الخيرات وهم لها سابقون
It is these who hasten in every good work, and these who are foremost in them.

ولا نكلف نفسا إلا وسعها ولدينا كتاب ينطق بالحق وهم لا يظلمون
On no soul do We place a burden greater than it can bear: before Us is a record which clearly shows the truth: they will never be wronged.

بل قلوبهم في غمرة من هذا ولهم أعمال من دون ذلك هم لها عاملون
But their hearts are in confused ignorance of this; and there are, besides that, deeds of theirs, which they will (continue) to do,-

حتى إذا أخذنا مترفيهم بالعذاب إذا هم يجأرون
Until, when We seize in Punishment those of them who received the good things of this world, behold, they will groan in supplication!

لا تجأروا اليوم إنكم منا لا تنصرون
(It will be said): "Groan not in supplication this day: for ye shall certainly not be helped by Us.

قد كانت آياتي تتلى عليكم فكنتم على أعقابكم تنكصون
"My Signs used to be rehearsed to you, but ye used to turn back on your heels-

مستكبرين به سامرا تهجرون
"In arrogance: talking nonsense about the (Qur'an), like one telling fables by night."

أفلم يدبروا القول أم جاءهم ما لم يأت آباءهم الأولين
Do they not ponder over the Word (of Allah), or has anything (new) come to them that did not come to their fathers of old?

أم لم يعرفوا رسولهم فهم له منكرون
Or do they not recognise their Messenger, that they deny him?

أم يقولون به جنة بل جاءهم بالحق وأكثرهم للحق كارهون
Or do they say, "He is possessed"? Nay, he has brought them the Truth, but most of them hate the Truth.

ولو اتبع الحق أهواءهم لفسدت السماوات والأرض ومن فيهن بل أتيناهم بذكرهم فهم عن ذكرهم معرضون
If the Truth had been in accord with their desires, truly the heavens and the earth, and all beings therein would have been in confusion and corruption! Nay, We have sent them their admonition, but they turn away from their admonition.

أم تسألهم خرجا فخراج ربك خير وهو خير الرازقين
Or is it that thou askest them for some recompense? But the recompense of thy Lord is best: He is the Best of those who give sustenance.

وإنك لتدعوهم إلى صراط مستقيم
But verily thou callest them to the Straight Way;

وإن الذين لا يؤمنون بالآخرة عن الصراط لناكبون
And verily those who believe not in the Hereafter are deviating from that Way.

ولو رحمناهم وكشفنا ما بهم من ضر للجوا في طغيانهم يعمهون
If We had mercy on them and removed the distress which is on them, they would obstinately persist in their transgression, wandering in distraction to and fro.

ولقد أخذناهم بالعذاب فما استكانوا لربهم وما يتضرعون
We inflicted Punishment on them, but they humbled not themselves to their Lord, nor do they submissively entreat (Him)!-

حتى إذا فتحنا عليهم بابا ذا عذاب شديد إذا هم فيه مبلسون
Until We open on them a gate leading to a severe Punishment: then Lo! they will be plunged in despair therein!

وهو الذي أنشأ لكم السمع والأبصار والأفئدة قليلا ما تشكرون
It is He Who has created for you (the faculties of) hearing, sight, feeling and understanding: little thanks it is ye give!

وهو الذي ذرأكم في الأرض وإليه تحشرون
And He has multiplied you through the earth, and to Him shall ye be gathered back.

وهو الذي يحيي ويميت وله اختلاف الليل والنهار أفلا تعقلون
It is He Who gives life and death, and to Him (is due) the alternation of Night and Day: will ye not then understand?

بل قالوا مثل ما قال الأولون
On the contrary they say things similar to what the ancients said.

قالوا أإذا متنا وكنا ترابا وعظاما أإنا لمبعوثون
They say: "What! when we die and become dust and bones, could we really be raised up again?

لقد وعدنا نحن وآباؤنا هذا من قبل إن هذا إلا أساطير الأولين
"Such things have been promised to us and to our fathers before! they are nothing but tales of the ancients!"

قل لمن الأرض ومن فيها إن كنتم تعلمون
Say: "To whom belong the earth and all beings therein? (say) if ye know!"

سيقولون لله قل أفلا تذكرون
They will say, "To Allah!" say: "Yet will ye not receive admonition?"

قل من رب السماوات السبع ورب العرش العظيم
Say: "Who is the Lord of the seven heavens, and the Lord of the Throne (of Glory) Supreme?"

سيقولون لله قل أفلا تتقون
They will say, "(They belong) to Allah." Say: "Will ye not then be filled with awe?"

قل من بيده ملكوت كل شيء وهو يجير ولا يجار عليه إن كنتم تعلمون
Say: "Who is it in whose hands is the governance of all things,- who protects (all), but is not protected (of any)? (say) if ye know."

سيقولون لله قل فأنى تسحرون
They will say, "(It belongs) to Allah." Say: "Then how are ye deluded?"

بل أتيناهم بالحق وإنهم لكاذبون
We have sent them the Truth: but they indeed practise falsehood!

ما اتخذ الله من ولد وما كان معه من إله إذا لذهب كل إله بما خلق ولعلا بعضهم على بعض سبحان الله عما يصفون
No son did Allah beget, nor is there any god along with Him: (if there were many gods), behold, each god would have taken away what he had created, and some would have lorded it over others! Glory to Allah! (He is free) from the (sort of) things they attribute to Him!

عالم الغيب والشهادة فتعالى عما يشركون
He knows what is hidden and what is open: too high is He for the partners they attribute to Him!

قل رب إما تريني ما يوعدون
Say: "O my Lord! if Thou wilt show me (in my lifetime) that which they are warned against,-

رب فلا تجعلني في القوم الظالمين
"Then, O my Lord! put me not amongst the people who do wrong!"

وإنا على أن نريك ما نعدهم لقادرون
And We are certainly able to show thee (in fulfilment) that against which they are warned.

ادفع بالتي هي أحسن السيئة نحن أعلم بما يصفون
Repel evil with that which is best: We are well acquainted with the things they say.

وقل رب أعوذ بك من همزات الشياطين
And say "O my Lord! I seek refuge with Thee from the suggestions of the Evil Ones.

وأعوذ بك رب أن يحضرون
"And I seek refuge with Thee O my Lord! lest they should come near me."

حتى إذا جاء أحدهم الموت قال رب ارجعون
(In Falsehood will they be) Until, when death comes to one of them, he says: "O my Lord! send me back (to life),-

لعلي أعمل صالحا فيما تركت كلا إنها كلمة هو قائلها ومن ورائهم برزخ إلى يوم يبعثون
"In order that I may work righteousness in the things I neglected." - "By no means! It is but a word he says."- Before them is a Partition till the Day they are raised up.

فإذا نفخ في الصور فلا أنساب بينهم يومئذ ولا يتساءلون
Then when the Trumpet is blown, there will be no more relationships between them that Day, nor will one ask after another!

فمن ثقلت موازينه فأولئك هم المفلحون
Then those whose balance (of good deeds) is heavy,- they will attain salvation:

ومن خفت موازينه فأولئك الذين خسروا أنفسهم في جهنم خالدون
But those whose balance is light, will be those who have lost their souls, in Hell will they abide.

تلفح وجوههم النار وهم فيها كالحون
The Fire will burn their faces, and they will therein grin, with their lips displaced.

ألم تكن آياتي تتلى عليكم فكنتم بها تكذبون
"Were not My Signs rehearsed to you, and ye did but treat them as falsehood?"

قالوا ربنا غلبت علينا شقوتنا وكنا قوما ضالين
They will say: "our Lord! Our misfortune overwhelmed us, and we became a people astray!

ربنا أخرجنا منها فإن عدنا فإنا ظالمون
"Our Lord! bring us out of this: if ever we return (to Evil), then shall we be wrong-doers indeed!"

قال اخسئوا فيها ولا تكلمون
He will say: "Be ye driven into it (with ignominy)! And speak ye not to Me!

إنه كان فريق من عبادي يقولون ربنا آمنا فاغفر لنا وارحمنا وأنت خير الراحمين
"A part of My servants there was, who used to pray 'our Lord! we believe; then do Thou forgive us, and have mercy upon us: For Thou art the Best of those who show mercy!"

فاتخذتموهم سخريا حتى أنسوكم ذكري وكنتم منهم تضحكون
"But ye treated them with ridicule, so much so that (ridicule of) them made you forget My Message while ye were laughing at them!

إني جزيتهم اليوم بما صبروا أنهم هم الفائزون
"I have rewarded them this Day for their patience and constancy: they are indeed the ones that have achieved Bliss..."

قال كم لبثتم في الأرض عدد سنين
He will say: "What number of years did ye stay on earth?"

قالوا لبثنا يوما أو بعض يوم فاسأل العادين
They will say: "We stayed a day or part of a day: but ask those who keep account."

قال إن لبثتم إلا قليلا لو أنكم كنتم تعلمون
He will say: "Ye stayed not but a little,- if ye had only known!

أفحسبتم أنما خلقناكم عبثا وأنكم إلينا لا ترجعون
"Did ye then think that We had created you in jest, and that ye would not be brought back to Us (for account)?"

فتعالى الله الملك الحق لا إله إلا هو رب العرش الكريم
Therefore exalted be Allah, the King, the Reality: there is no god but He, the Lord of the Throne of Honour!

ومن يدع مع الله إلها آخر لا برهان له به فإنما حسابه عند ربه إنه لا يفلح الكافرون
If anyone invokes, besides Allah, Any other god, he has no authority therefor; and his reckoning will be only with his Lord! and verily the Unbelievers will fail to win through!

وقل رب اغفر وارحم وأنت خير الراحمين
So say: "O my Lord! grant Thou forgiveness and mercy for Thou art the Best of those who show mercy!"

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم سورة أنزلناها وفرضناها وأنزلنا فيها آيات بينات لعلكم تذكرون
A sura which We have sent down and which We have ordained in it have We sent down Clear Signs, in order that ye may receive admonition.

الزانية والزاني فاجلدوا كل واحد منهما مائة جلدة ولا تأخذكم بهما رأفة في دين الله إن كنتم تؤمنون بالله واليوم الآخر وليشهد عذابهما طائفة من المؤمنين
The woman and the man guilty of adultery or fornication,- flog each of them with a hundred stripes: Let not compassion move you in their case, in a matter prescribed by Allah, if ye believe in Allah and the Last Day: and let a party of the Believers witness their punishment.

الزاني لا ينكح إلا زانية أو مشركة والزانية لا ينكحها إلا زان أو مشرك وحرم ذلك على المؤمنين
Let no man guilty of adultery or fornication marry and but a woman similarly guilty, or an Unbeliever: nor let any but such a man or an Unbeliever marry such a woman: to the Believers such a thing is forbidden.

والذين يرمون المحصنات ثم لم يأتوا بأربعة شهداء فاجلدوهم ثمانين جلدة ولا تقبلوا لهم شهادة أبدا وأولئك هم الفاسقون
And those who launch a charge against chaste women, and produce not four witnesses (to support their allegations),- flog them with eighty stripes; and reject their evidence ever after: for such men are wicked transgressors;-

إلا الذين تابوا من بعد ذلك وأصلحوا فإن الله غفور رحيم
Unless they repent thereafter and mend (their conduct); for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

والذين يرمون أزواجهم ولم يكن لهم شهداء إلا أنفسهم فشهادة أحدهم أربع شهادات بالله إنه لمن الصادقين
And for those who launch a charge against their spouses, and have (in support) no evidence but their own,- their solitary evidence (can be received) if they bear witness four times (with an oath) by Allah that they are solemnly telling the truth;

والخامسة أن لعنت الله عليه إن كان من الكاذبين
And the fifth (oath) (should be) that they solemnly invoke the curse of Allah on themselves if they tell a lie.

ويدرأ عنها العذاب أن تشهد أربع شهادات بالله إنه لمن الكاذبين
But it would avert the punishment from the wife, if she bears witness four times (with an oath) By Allah, that (her husband) is telling a lie;

والخامسة أن غضب الله عليها إن كان من الصادقين
And the fifth (oath) should be that she solemnly invokes the wrath of Allah on herself if (her accuser) is telling the truth.

ولولا فضل الله عليكم ورحمته وأن الله تواب حكيم
If it were not for Allah's grace and mercy on you, and that Allah is Oft-Returning, full of Wisdom,- (Ye would be ruined indeed).

إن الذين جاءوا بالإفك عصبة منكم لا تحسبوه شرا لكم بل هو خير لكم لكل امرئ منهم ما اكتسب من الإثم والذي تولى كبره منهم له عذاب عظيم
Those who brought forward the lie are a body among yourselves: think it not to be an evil to you; On the contrary it is good for you: to every man among them (will come the punishment) of the sin that he earned, and to him who took on himself the lead among them, will be a penalty grievous.

لولا إذ سمعتموه ظن المؤمنون والمؤمنات بأنفسهم خيرا وقالوا هذا إفك مبين
Why did not the believers - men and women - when ye heard of the affair,- put the best construction on it in their own minds and say, "This (charge) is an obvious lie"?

لولا جاءوا عليه بأربعة شهداء فإذ لم يأتوا بالشهداء فأولئك عند الله هم الكاذبون
Why did they not bring four witnesses to prove it? When they have not brought the witnesses, such men, in the sight of Allah, (stand forth) themselves as liars!

ولولا فضل الله عليكم ورحمته في الدنيا والآخرة لمسكم في ما أفضتم فيه عذاب عظيم
Were it not for the grace and mercy of Allah on you, in this world and the Hereafter, a grievous penalty would have seized you in that ye rushed glibly into this affair.

إذ تلقونه بألسنتكم وتقولون بأفواهكم ما ليس لكم به علم وتحسبونه هينا وهو عند الله عظيم
Behold, ye received it on your tongues, and said out of your mouths things of which ye had no knowledge; and ye thought it to be a light matter, while it was most serious in the sight of Allah.

ولولا إذ سمعتموه قلتم ما يكون لنا أن نتكلم بهذا سبحانك هذا بهتان عظيم
And why did ye not, when ye heard it, say? - "It is not right of us to speak of this: Glory to Allah! this is a most serious slander!"

يعظكم الله أن تعودوا لمثله أبدا إن كنتم مؤمنين
Allah doth admonish you, that ye may never repeat such (conduct), if ye are (true) Believers.

ويبين الله لكم الآيات والله عليم حكيم
And Allah makes the Signs plain to you: for Allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.

إن الذين يحبون أن تشيع الفاحشة في الذين آمنوا لهم عذاب أليم في الدنيا والآخرة والله يعلم وأنتم لا تعلمون
Those who love (to see) scandal published broadcast among the Believers, will have a grievous Penalty in this life and in the Hereafter: Allah knows, and ye know not.

ولولا فضل الله عليكم ورحمته وأن الله رءوف رحيم
Were it not for the grace and mercy of Allah on you, and that Allah is full of kindness and mercy, (ye would be ruined indeed).

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تتبعوا خطوات الشيطان ومن يتبع خطوات الشيطان فإنه يأمر بالفحشاء والمنكر ولولا فضل الله عليكم ورحمته ما زكى منكم من أحد أبدا ولكن الله يزكي من يشاء والله سميع عليم
O ye who believe! follow not Satan's footsteps: if any will follow the footsteps of Satan, he will (but) command what is shameful and wrong: and were it not for the grace and mercy of Allah on you, not one of you would ever have been pure: but Allah doth purify whom He pleases: and Allah is One Who hears and knows (all things).

ولا يأتل أولو الفضل منكم والسعة أن يؤتوا أولي القربى والمساكين والمهاجرين في سبيل الله وليعفوا وليصفحوا ألا تحبون أن يغفر الله لكم والله غفور رحيم
Let not those among you who are endued with grace and amplitude of means resolve by oath against helping their kinsmen, those in want, and those who have left their homes in Allah's cause: let them forgive and overlook, do you not wish that Allah should forgive you? For Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

إن الذين يرمون المحصنات الغافلات المؤمنات لعنوا في الدنيا والآخرة ولهم عذاب عظيم
Those who slander chaste women, indiscreet but believing, are cursed in this life and in the Hereafter: for them is a grievous Penalty,-

يوم تشهد عليهم ألسنتهم وأيديهم وأرجلهم بما كانوا يعملون
On the Day when their tongues, their hands, and their feet will bear witness against them as to their actions.

يومئذ يوفيهم الله دينهم الحق ويعلمون أن الله هو الحق المبين
On that Day Allah will pay them back (all) their just dues, and they will realise that Allah is the (very) Truth, that makes all things manifest.

الخبيثات للخبيثين والخبيثون للخبيثات والطيبات للطيبين والطيبون للطيبات أولئك مبرءون مما يقولون لهم مغفرة ورزق كريم
Women impure are for men impure, and men impure for women impure and women of purity are for men of purity, and men of purity are for women of purity: these are not affected by what people say: for them there is forgiveness, and a provision honourable.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تدخلوا بيوتا غير بيوتكم حتى تستأنسوا وتسلموا على أهلها ذلكم خير لكم لعلكم تذكرون
O ye who believe! enter not houses other than your own, until ye have asked permission and saluted those in them: that is best for you, in order that ye may heed (what is seemly).

فإن لم تجدوا فيها أحدا فلا تدخلوها حتى يؤذن لكم وإن قيل لكم ارجعوا فارجعوا هو أزكى لكم والله بما تعملون عليم
If ye find no one in the house, enter not until permission is given to you: if ye are asked to go back, go back: that makes for greater purity for yourselves: and Allah knows well all that ye do.

ليس عليكم جناح أن تدخلوا بيوتا غير مسكونة فيها متاع لكم والله يعلم ما تبدون وما تكتمون
It is no fault on your part to enter houses not used for living in, which serve some (other) use for you: And Allah has knowledge of what ye reveal and what ye conceal.

قل للمؤمنين يغضوا من أبصارهم ويحفظوا فروجهم ذلك أزكى لهم إن الله خبير بما يصنعون
Say to the believing men that they should lower their gaze and guard their modesty: that will make for greater purity for them: And Allah is well acquainted with all that they do.

وقل للمؤمنات يغضضن من أبصارهن ويحفظن فروجهن ولا يبدين زينتهن إلا ما ظهر منها وليضربن بخمرهن على جيوبهن ولا يبدين زينتهن إلا لبعولتهن أو آبائهن أو آباء بعولتهن أو أبنائهن أو أبناء بعولتهن أو إخوانهن أو بني إخوانهن أو بني أخواتهن أو نسائهن أو ما ملكت أيمانهن أو التابعين غير أولي الإربة من الرجال أو الطفل الذين لم يظهروا على عورات النساء ولا يضربن بأرجلهن ليعلم ما يخفين من زينتهن وتوبوا إلى الله جميعا أيه المؤمنون لعلكم تفلحون
And say to the believing women that they should lower their gaze and guard their modesty; that they should not display their beauty and ornaments except what (must ordinarily) appear thereof; that they should draw their veils over their bosoms and not display their beauty except to their husbands, their fathers, their husband's fathers, their sons, their husbands' sons, their brothers or their brothers' sons, or their sisters' sons, or their women, or the slaves whom their right hands possess, or male servants free of physical needs, or small children who have no sense of the shame of sex; and that they should not strike their feet in order to draw attention to their hidden ornaments. And O ye Believers! turn ye all together towards Allah, that ye may attain Bliss.

وأنكحوا الأيامى منكم والصالحين من عبادكم وإمائكم إن يكونوا فقراء يغنهم الله من فضله والله واسع عليم
Marry those among you who are single, or the virtuous ones among yourselves, male or female: if they are in poverty, Allah will give them means out of His grace: for Allah encompasseth all, and he knoweth all things.

وليستعفف الذين لا يجدون نكاحا حتى يغنيهم الله من فضله والذين يبتغون الكتاب مما ملكت أيمانكم فكاتبوهم إن علمتم فيهم خيرا وآتوهم من مال الله الذي آتاكم ولا تكرهوا فتياتكم على البغاء إن أردن تحصنا لتبتغوا عرض الحياة الدنيا ومن يكرههن فإن الله من بعد إكراههن غفور رحيم
Let those who find not the wherewithal for marriage keep themselves chaste, until Allah gives them means out of His grace. And if any of your slaves ask for a deed in writing (to enable them to earn their freedom for a certain sum), give them such a deed if ye know any good in them: yea, give them something yourselves out of the means which Allah has given to you. But force not your maids to prostitution when they desire chastity, in order that ye may make a gain in the goods of this life. But if anyone compels them, yet, after such compulsion, is Allah, Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful (to them),

ولقد أنزلنا إليكم آيات مبينات ومثلا من الذين خلوا من قبلكم وموعظة للمتقين
We have already sent down to you verses making things clear, an illustration from (the story of) people who passed away before you, and an admonition for those who fear (Allah).

الله نور السماوات والأرض مثل نوره كمشكاة فيها مصباح المصباح في زجاجة الزجاجة كأنها كوكب دري يوقد من شجرة مباركة زيتونة لا شرقية ولا غربية يكاد زيتها يضيء ولو لم تمسسه نار نور على نور يهدي الله لنوره من يشاء ويضرب الله الأمثال للناس والله بكل شيء عليم
Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The Parable of His Light is as if there were a Niche and within it a Lamp: the Lamp enclosed in Glass: the glass as it were a brilliant star: Lit from a blessed Tree, an Olive, neither of the east nor of the west, whose oil is well-nigh luminous, though fire scarce touched it: Light upon Light! Allah doth guide whom He will to His Light: Allah doth set forth Parables for men: and Allah doth know all things.

في بيوت أذن الله أن ترفع ويذكر فيها اسمه يسبح له فيها بالغدو والآصال
(Lit is such a Light) in houses, which Allah hath permitted to be raised to honour; for the celebration, in them, of His name: In them is He glorified in the mornings and in the evenings, (again and again),-

رجال لا تلهيهم تجارة ولا بيع عن ذكر الله وإقام الصلاة وإيتاء الزكاة يخافون يوما تتقلب فيه القلوب والأبصار
By men whom neither traffic nor merchandise can divert from the Remembrance of Allah, nor from regular Prayer, nor from the practice of regular Charity: Their (only) fear is for the Day when hearts and eyes will be transformed (in a world wholly new),-

ليجزيهم الله أحسن ما عملوا ويزيدهم من فضله والله يرزق من يشاء بغير حساب
That Allah may reward them according to the best of their deeds, and add even more for them out of His Grace: for Allah doth provide for those whom He will, without measure.

والذين كفروا أعمالهم كسراب بقيعة يحسبه الظمآن ماء حتى إذا جاءه لم يجده شيئا ووجد الله عنده فوفاه حسابه والله سريع الحساب
But the Unbelievers,- their deeds are like a mirage in sandy deserts, which the man parched with thirst mistakes for water; until when he comes up to it, he finds it to be nothing: But he finds Allah (ever) with him, and Allah will pay him his account: and Allah is swift in taking account.

أو كظلمات في بحر لجي يغشاه موج من فوقه موج من فوقه سحاب ظلمات بعضها فوق بعض إذا أخرج يده لم يكد يراها ومن لم يجعل الله له نورا فما له من نور
Or (the Unbelievers' state) is like the depths of darkness in a vast deep ocean, overwhelmed with billow topped by billow, topped by (dark) clouds: depths of darkness, one above another: if a man stretches out his hands, he can hardly see it! for any to whom Allah giveth not light, there is no light!

ألم تر أن الله يسبح له من في السماوات والأرض والطير صافات كل قد علم صلاته وتسبيحه والله عليم بما يفعلون
Seest thou not that it is Allah Whose praises all beings in the heavens and on earth do celebrate, and the birds (of the air) with wings outspread? Each one knows its own (mode of) prayer and praise. And Allah knows well all that they do.

ولله ملك السماوات والأرض وإلى الله المصير
Yea, to Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth; and to Allah is the final goal (of all).

ألم تر أن الله يزجي سحابا ثم يؤلف بينه ثم يجعله ركاما فترى الودق يخرج من خلاله وينزل من السماء من جبال فيها من برد فيصيب به من يشاء ويصرفه عن من يشاء يكاد سنا برقه يذهب بالأبصار
Seest thou not that Allah makes the clouds move gently, then joins them together, then makes them into a heap? - then wilt thou see rain issue forth from their midst. And He sends down from the sky mountain masses (of clouds) wherein is hail: He strikes therewith whom He pleases and He turns it away from whom He pleases, the vivid flash of His lightning well-nigh blinds the sight.

يقلب الله الليل والنهار إن في ذلك لعبرة لأولي الأبصار
It is Allah Who alternates the Night and the Day: verily in these things is an instructive example for those who have vision!

والله خلق كل دابة من ماء فمنهم من يمشي على بطنه ومنهم من يمشي على رجلين ومنهم من يمشي على أربع يخلق الله ما يشاء إن الله على كل شيء قدير
And Allah has created every animal from water: of them there are some that creep on their bellies; some that walk on two legs; and some that walk on four. Allah creates what He wills for verily Allah has power over all things.

لقد أنزلنا آيات مبينات والله يهدي من يشاء إلى صراط مستقيم
We have indeed sent down signs that make things manifest: and Allah guides whom He wills to a way that is straight.

ويقولون آمنا بالله وبالرسول وأطعنا ثم يتولى فريق منهم من بعد ذلك وما أولئك بالمؤمنين
They say, "We believe in Allah and in the messenger, and we obey": but even after that, some of them turn away: they are not (really) Believers.

وإذا دعوا إلى الله ورسوله ليحكم بينهم إذا فريق منهم معرضون
When they are summoned to Allah and His messenger, in order that He may judge between them, behold some of them decline (to come).

وإن يكن لهم الحق يأتوا إليه مذعنين
But if the right is on their side, they come to him with all submission.

أفي قلوبهم مرض أم ارتابوا أم يخافون أن يحيف الله عليهم ورسوله بل أولئك هم الظالمون
Is it that there is a disease in their hearts? or do they doubt, or are they in fear, that Allah and His Messenger will deal unjustly with them? Nay, it is they themselves who do wrong.

إنما كان قول المؤمنين إذا دعوا إلى الله ورسوله ليحكم بينهم أن يقولوا سمعنا وأطعنا وأولئك هم المفلحون
The answer of the Believers, when summoned to Allah and His Messenger, in order that He may judge between them, is no other than this: they say, "We hear and we obey": it is such as these that will attain felicity.

ومن يطع الله ورسوله ويخش الله ويتقه فأولئك هم الفائزون
It is such as obey Allah and His Messenger, and fear Allah and do right, that will win (in the end),

وأقسموا بالله جهد أيمانهم لئن أمرتهم ليخرجن قل لا تقسموا طاعة معروفة إن الله خبير بما تعملون
They swear their strongest oaths by Allah that, if only thou wouldst command them, they would leave (their homes). Say: "Swear ye not; Obedience is (more) reasonable; verily, Allah is well acquainted with all that ye do."

قل أطيعوا الله وأطيعوا الرسول فإن تولوا فإنما عليه ما حمل وعليكم ما حملتم وإن تطيعوه تهتدوا وما على الرسول إلا البلاغ المبين
Say: "Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger: but if ye turn away, he is only responsible for the duty placed on him and ye for that placed on you. If ye obey him, ye shall be on right guidance. The Messenger's duty is only to preach the clear (Message).

وعد الله الذين آمنوا منكم وعملوا الصالحات ليستخلفنهم في الأرض كما استخلف الذين من قبلهم وليمكنن لهم دينهم الذي ارتضى لهم وليبدلنهم من بعد خوفهم أمنا يعبدونني لا يشركون بي شيئا ومن كفر بعد ذلك فأولئك هم الفاسقون
Allah has promised, to those among you who believe and work righteous deeds, that He will, of a surety, grant them in the land, inheritance (of power), as He granted it to those before them; that He will establish in authority their religion - the one which He has chosen for them; and that He will change (their state), after the fear in which they (lived), to one of security and peace: 'They will worship Me (alone) and not associate aught with Me. 'If any do reject Faith after this, they are rebellious and wicked.

وأقيموا الصلاة وآتوا الزكاة وأطيعوا الرسول لعلكم ترحمون
So establish regular Prayer and give regular Charity; and obey the Messenger; that ye may receive mercy.

لا تحسبن الذين كفروا معجزين في الأرض ومأواهم النار ولبئس المصير
Never think thou that the Unbelievers are going to frustrate (Allah's Plan) on earth: their abode is the Fire,- and it is indeed an evil refuge!

يا أيها الذين آمنوا ليستأذنكم الذين ملكت أيمانكم والذين لم يبلغوا الحلم منكم ثلاث مرات من قبل صلاة الفجر وحين تضعون ثيابكم من الظهيرة ومن بعد صلاة العشاء ثلاث عورات لكم ليس عليكم ولا عليهم جناح بعدهن طوافون عليكم بعضكم على بعض كذلك يبين الله لكم الآيات والله عليم حكيم
O ye who believe! let those whom your right hands possess, and the (children) among you who have not come of age ask your permission (before they come to your presence), on three occasions: before morning prayer; the while ye doff your clothes for the noonday heat; and after the late-night prayer: these are your three times of undress: outside those times it is not wrong for you or for them to move about attending to each other: Thus does Allah make clear the Signs to you: for Allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.

وإذا بلغ الأطفال منكم الحلم فليستأذنوا كما استأذن الذين من قبلهم كذلك يبين الله لكم آياته والله عليم حكيم
But when the children among you come of age, let them (also) ask for permission, as do those senior to them (in age): Thus does Allah make clear His Signs to you: for Allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.

والقواعد من النساء اللاتي لا يرجون نكاحا فليس عليهن جناح أن يضعن ثيابهن غير متبرجات بزينة وأن يستعففن خير لهن والله سميع عليم
Such elderly women as are past the prospect of marriage,- there is no blame on them if they lay aside their (outer) garments, provided they make not a wanton display of their beauty: but it is best for them to be modest: and Allah is One Who sees and knows all things.

ليس على الأعمى حرج ولا على الأعرج حرج ولا على المريض حرج ولا على أنفسكم أن تأكلوا من بيوتكم أو بيوت آبائكم أو بيوت أمهاتكم أو بيوت إخوانكم أو بيوت أخواتكم أو بيوت أعمامكم أو بيوت عماتكم أو بيوت أخوالكم أو بيوت خالاتكم أو ما ملكتم مفاتحه أو صديقكم ليس عليكم جناح أن تأكلوا جميعا أو أشتاتا فإذا دخلتم بيوتا فسلموا على أنفسكم تحية من عند الله مباركة طيبة كذلك يبين الله لكم الآيات لعلكم تعقلون
It is no fault in the blind nor in one born lame, nor in one afflicted with illness, nor in yourselves, that ye should eat in your own houses, or those of your fathers, or your mothers, or your brothers, or your sisters, or your father's brothers or your father's sisters, or your mother's brothers, or your mother's sisters, or in houses of which the keys are in your possession, or in the house of a sincere friend of yours: there is no blame on you, whether ye eat in company or separately. But if ye enter houses, salute each other - a greeting of blessing and purity as from Allah. Thus does Allah make clear the signs to you: that ye may understand.

إنما المؤمنون الذين آمنوا بالله ورسوله وإذا كانوا معه على أمر جامع لم يذهبوا حتى يستأذنوه إن الذين يستأذنونك أولئك الذين يؤمنون بالله ورسوله فإذا استأذنوك لبعض شأنهم فأذن لمن شئت منهم واستغفر لهم الله إن الله غفور رحيم
Only those are believers, who believe in Allah and His Messenger: when they are with him on a matter requiring collective action, they do not depart until they have asked for his leave; those who ask for thy leave are those who believe in Allah and His Messenger; so when they ask for thy leave, for some business of theirs, give leave to those of them whom thou wilt, and ask Allah for their forgiveness: for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

لا تجعلوا دعاء الرسول بينكم كدعاء بعضكم بعضا قد يعلم الله الذين يتسللون منكم لواذا فليحذر الذين يخالفون عن أمره أن تصيبهم فتنة أو يصيبهم عذاب أليم
Deem not the summons of the Messenger among yourselves like the summons of one of you to another: Allah doth know those of you who slip away under shelter of some excuse: then let those beware who withstand the Messenger's order, lest some trial befall them, or a grievous penalty be inflicted on them.

ألا إن لله ما في السماوات والأرض قد يعلم ما أنتم عليه ويوم يرجعون إليه فينبئهم بما عملوا والله بكل شيء عليم
Be quite sure that to Allah doth belong whatever is in the heavens and on earth. Well doth He know what ye are intent upon: and one day they will be brought back to Him, and He will tell them the truth of what they did: for Allah doth know all things.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم تبارك الذي نزل الفرقان على عبده ليكون للعالمين نذيرا
Blessed is He who sent down the criterion to His servant, that it may be an admonition to all creatures;-

الذي له ملك السماوات والأرض ولم يتخذ ولدا ولم يكن له شريك في الملك وخلق كل شيء فقدره تقديرا
He to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth: no son has He begotten, nor has He a partner in His dominion: it is He who created all things, and ordered them in due proportions.

واتخذوا من دونه آلهة لا يخلقون شيئا وهم يخلقون ولا يملكون لأنفسهم ضرا ولا نفعا ولا يملكون موتا ولا حياة ولا نشورا
Yet have they taken, besides him, gods that can create nothing but are themselves created; that have no control of hurt or good to themselves; nor can they control death nor life nor resurrection.

وقال الذين كفروا إن هذا إلا إفك افتراه وأعانه عليه قوم آخرون فقد جاءوا ظلما وزورا
But the misbelievers say: "Naught is this but a lie which he has forged, and others have helped him at it." In truth it is they who have put forward an iniquity and a falsehood.

وقالوا أساطير الأولين اكتتبها فهي تملى عليه بكرة وأصيلا
And they say: "Tales of the ancients, which he has caused to be written: and they are dictated before him morning and evening."

قل أنزله الذي يعلم السر في السماوات والأرض إنه كان غفورا رحيما
Say: "The (Qur'an) was sent down by Him who knows the mystery (that is) in the heavens and the earth: verily He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

وقالوا مال هذا الرسول يأكل الطعام ويمشي في الأسواق لولا أنزل إليه ملك فيكون معه نذيرا
And they say: "What sort of a messenger is this, who eats food, and walks through the streets? Why has not an angel been sent down to him to give admonition with him?

أو يلقى إليه كنز أو تكون له جنة يأكل منها وقال الظالمون إن تتبعون إلا رجلا مسحورا
"Or (Why) has not a treasure been bestowed on him, or why has he (not) a garden for enjoyment?" The wicked say: "Ye follow none other than a man bewitched."

انظر كيف ضربوا لك الأمثال فضلوا فلا يستطيعون سبيلا
See what kinds of comparisons they make for thee! But they have gone astray, and never a way will they be able to find!

تبارك الذي إن شاء جعل لك خيرا من ذلك جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار ويجعل لك قصورا
Blessed is He who, if that were His will, could give thee better (things) than those,- Gardens beneath which rivers flow; and He could give thee palaces (secure to dwell in).

بل كذبوا بالساعة وأعتدنا لمن كذب بالساعة سعيرا
Nay they deny the hour (of the judgment to come): but We have prepared a blazing fire for such as deny the hour:

إذا رأتهم من مكان بعيد سمعوا لها تغيظا وزفيرا
When it sees them from a place far off, they will hear its fury and its ranging sigh.

وإذا ألقوا منها مكانا ضيقا مقرنين دعوا هنالك ثبورا
And when they are cast, bound together into a constricted place therein, they will plead for destruction there and then!

لا تدعوا اليوم ثبورا واحدا وادعوا ثبورا كثيرا
"This day plead not for a single destruction: plead for destruction oft-repeated!"

قل أذلك خير أم جنة الخلد التي وعد المتقون كانت لهم جزاء ومصيرا
Say: "Is that best, or the eternal garden, promised to the righteous? for them, that is a reward as well as a goal (of attainment).

لهم فيها ما يشاءون خالدين كان على ربك وعدا مسئولا
"For them there will be therein all that they wish for: they will dwell (there) for aye: A promise to be prayed for from thy Lord."

ويوم يحشرهم وما يعبدون من دون الله فيقول أأنتم أضللتم عبادي هؤلاء أم هم ضلوا السبيل
The day He will gather them together as well as those whom they worship besides Allah, He will ask: "Was it ye who let these My servants astray, or did they stray from the Path themselves?"

قالوا سبحانك ما كان ينبغي لنا أن نتخذ من دونك من أولياء ولكن متعتهم وآباءهم حتى نسوا الذكر وكانوا قوما بورا
They will say: "Glory to Thee! not meet was it for us that we should take for protectors others besides Thee: But Thou didst bestow, on them and their fathers, good things (in life), until they forgot the Message: for they were a people (worthless and) lost."

فقد كذبوكم بما تقولون فما تستطيعون صرفا ولا نصرا ومن يظلم منكم نذقه عذابا كبيرا
(Allah will say): "Now have they proved you liars in what ye say: so ye cannot avert (your penalty) nor (get) help." And whoever among you does wrong, him shall We cause to taste of a grievous Penalty.

وما أرسلنا قبلك من المرسلين إلا إنهم ليأكلون الطعام ويمشون في الأسواق وجعلنا بعضكم لبعض فتنة أتصبرون وكان ربك بصيرا
And the messengers whom We sent before thee were all (men) who ate food and walked through the streets: We have made some of you as a trial for others: will ye have patience? for Allah is One Who sees (all things).

وقال الذين لا يرجون لقاءنا لولا أنزل علينا الملائكة أو نرى ربنا لقد استكبروا في أنفسهم وعتوا عتوا كبيرا
Such as fear not the meeting with Us (for Judgment) say: "Why are not the angels sent down to us, or (why) do we not see our Lord?" Indeed they have an arrogant conceit of themselves, and mighty is the insolence of their impiety!

يوم يرون الملائكة لا بشرى يومئذ للمجرمين ويقولون حجرا محجورا
The Day they see the angels,- no joy will there be to the sinners that Day: The (angels) will say: "There is a barrier forbidden (to you) altogether!"

وقدمنا إلى ما عملوا من عمل فجعلناه هباء منثورا
And We shall turn to whatever deeds they did (in this life), and We shall make such deeds as floating dust scattered about.

أصحاب الجنة يومئذ خير مستقرا وأحسن مقيلا
The Companions of the Garden will be well, that Day, in their abode, and have the fairest of places for repose.

ويوم تشقق السماء بالغمام ونزل الملائكة تنزيلا
The Day the heaven shall be rent asunder with clouds, and angels shall be sent down, descending (in ranks),-

الملك يومئذ الحق للرحمن وكان يوما على الكافرين عسيرا
That Day, the dominion as of right and truth, shall be (wholly) for (Allah) Most Merciful: it will be a Day of dire difficulty for the misbelievers.

ويوم يعض الظالم على يديه يقول يا ليتني اتخذت مع الرسول سبيلا
The Day that the wrong-doer will bite at his hands, he will say, "Oh! would that I had taken a (straight) path with the Messenger!

يا ويلتى ليتني لم أتخذ فلانا خليلا
"Ah! woe is me! Would that I had never taken such a one for a friend!

لقد أضلني عن الذكر بعد إذ جاءني وكان الشيطان للإنسان خذولا
"He did lead me astray from the Message (of Allah) after it had come to me! Ah! the Evil One is but a traitor to man!"

وقال الرسول يا رب إن قومي اتخذوا هذا القرآن مهجورا
Then the Messenger will say: "O my Lord! Truly my people took this Qur'an for just foolish nonsense."

وكذلك جعلنا لكل نبي عدوا من المجرمين وكفى بربك هاديا ونصيرا
Thus have We made for every prophet an enemy among the sinners: but enough is thy Lord to guide and to help.

وقال الذين كفروا لولا نزل عليه القرآن جملة واحدة كذلك لنثبت به فؤادك ورتلناه ترتيلا
Those who reject Faith say: "Why is not the Qur'an revealed to him all at once? Thus (is it revealed), that We may strengthen thy heart thereby, and We have rehearsed it to thee in slow, well-arranged stages, gradually.

ولا يأتونك بمثل إلا جئناك بالحق وأحسن تفسيرا
And no question do they bring to thee but We reveal to thee the truth and the best explanation (thereof).

الذين يحشرون على وجوههم إلى جهنم أولئك شر مكانا وأضل سبيلا
Those who will be gathered to Hell (prone) on their faces,- they will be in an evil plight, and, as to Path, most astray.

ولقد آتينا موسى الكتاب وجعلنا معه أخاه هارون وزيرا
(Before this,) We sent Moses The Book, and appointed his brother Aaron with him as minister;

فقلنا اذهبا إلى القوم الذين كذبوا بآياتنا فدمرناهم تدميرا
And We command: "Go ye both, to the people who have rejected our Signs:" And those (people) We destroyed with utter destruction.

وقوم نوح لما كذبوا الرسل أغرقناهم وجعلناهم للناس آية وأعتدنا للظالمين عذابا أليما
And the people of Noah,- when they rejected the messengers, We drowned them, and We made them as a Sign for mankind; and We have prepared for (all) wrong-doers a grievous Penalty;-

وعادا وثمود وأصحاب الرس وقرونا بين ذلك كثيرا
As also 'Ad and Thamud, and the Companions of the Rass, and many a generation between them.

وكلا ضربنا له الأمثال وكلا تبرنا تتبيرا
To each one We set forth Parables and examples; and each one We broke to utter annihilation (for their sins).

ولقد أتوا على القرية التي أمطرت مطر السوء أفلم يكونوا يرونها بل كانوا لا يرجون نشورا
And the (Unbelievers) must indeed have passed by the town on which was rained a shower of evil: did they not then see it (with their own eyes)? But they fear not the Resurrection.

وإذا رأوك إن يتخذونك إلا هزوا أهذا الذي بعث الله رسولا
When they see thee, they treat thee no otherwise than in mockery: "Is this the one whom Allah has sent as a messenger?"

إن كاد ليضلنا عن آلهتنا لولا أن صبرنا عليها وسوف يعلمون حين يرون العذاب من أضل سبيلا
"He indeed would well-nigh have misled us from our gods, had it not been that we were constant to them!" - Soon will they know, when they see the Penalty, who it is that is most misled in Path!

أرأيت من اتخذ إلهه هواه أفأنت تكون عليه وكيلا
Seest thou such a one as taketh for his god his own passion (or impulse)? Couldst thou be a disposer of affairs for him?

أم تحسب أن أكثرهم يسمعون أو يعقلون إن هم إلا كالأنعام بل هم أضل سبيلا
Or thinkest thou that most of them listen or understand? They are only like cattle;- nay, they are worse astray in Path.

ألم تر إلى ربك كيف مد الظل ولو شاء لجعله ساكنا ثم جعلنا الشمس عليه دليلا
Hast thou not turned thy vision to thy Lord?- How He doth prolong the shadow! If He willed, He could make it stationary! then do We make the sun its guide;

ثم قبضناه إلينا قبضا يسيرا
Then We draw it in towards Ourselves,- a contraction by easy stages.

وهو الذي جعل لكم الليل لباسا والنوم سباتا وجعل النهار نشورا
And He it is Who makes the Night as a Robe for you, and Sleep as Repose, and makes the Day (as it were) a Resurrection.

وهو الذي أرسل الرياح بشرا بين يدي رحمته وأنزلنا من السماء ماء طهورا
And He it is Who sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings, going before His mercy, and We send down pure water from the sky,-

لنحيي به بلدة ميتا ونسقيه مما خلقنا أنعاما وأناسي كثيرا
That with it We may give life to a dead land, and slake the thirst of things We have created,- cattle and men in great numbers.

ولقد صرفناه بينهم ليذكروا فأبى أكثر الناس إلا كفورا
And We have distributed the (water) amongst them, in order that they may celebrate (our) praises, but most men are averse (to aught) but (rank) ingratitude.

ولو شئنا لبعثنا في كل قرية نذيرا
Had it been Our Will, We could have sent a warner to every centre of population.

فلا تطع الكافرين وجاهدهم به جهادا كبيرا
Therefore listen not to the Unbelievers, but strive against them with the utmost strenuousness, with the (Qur'an).

وهو الذي مرج البحرين هذا عذب فرات وهذا ملح أجاج وجعل بينهما برزخا وحجرا محجورا
It is He Who has let free the two bodies of flowing water: One palatable and sweet, and the other salt and bitter; yet has He made a barrier between them, a partition that is forbidden to be passed.

وهو الذي خلق من الماء بشرا فجعله نسبا وصهرا وكان ربك قديرا
It is He Who has created man from water: then has He established relationships of lineage and marriage: for thy Lord has power (over all things).

ويعبدون من دون الله ما لا ينفعهم ولا يضرهم وكان الكافر على ربه ظهيرا
Yet do they worship, besides Allah, things that can neither profit them nor harm them: and the Misbeliever is a helper (of Evil), against his own Lord!

وما أرسلناك إلا مبشرا ونذيرا
But thee We only sent to give glad tidings and admonition.

قل ما أسألكم عليه من أجر إلا من شاء أن يتخذ إلى ربه سبيلا
Say: "No reward do I ask of you for it but this: that each one who will may take a (straight) Path to his Lord."

وتوكل على الحي الذي لا يموت وسبح بحمده وكفى به بذنوب عباده خبيرا
And put thy trust in Him Who lives and dies not; and celebrate his praise; and enough is He to be acquainted with the faults of His servants;-

الذي خلق السماوات والأرض وما بينهما في ستة أيام ثم استوى على العرش الرحمن فاسأل به خبيرا
He Who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between, in six days, and is firmly established on the Throne (of Authority): Allah Most Gracious: ask thou, then, about Him of any acquainted (with such things).

وإذا قيل لهم اسجدوا للرحمن قالوا وما الرحمن أنسجد لما تأمرنا وزادهم نفورا
When it is said to them, "Prostrate to (Allah) Most Gracious!", they say, "And what is (Allah) Most Gracious? Shall we prostrate to that which thou commandest us?" And it increases their flight (from the Truth).

تبارك الذي جعل في السماء بروجا وجعل فيها سراجا وقمرا منيرا
Blessed is He Who made constellations in the skies, and placed therein a Lamp and a Moon giving light;

وهو الذي جعل الليل والنهار خلفة لمن أراد أن يذكر أو أراد شكورا
And it is He Who made the Night and the Day to follow each other: for such as have the will to celebrate His praises or to show their gratitude.

وعباد الرحمن الذين يمشون على الأرض هونا وإذا خاطبهم الجاهلون قالوا سلاما
And the servants of (Allah) Most Gracious are those who walk on the earth in humility, and when the ignorant address them, they say, "Peace!";

والذين يبيتون لربهم سجدا وقياما
Those who spend the night in adoration of their Lord prostrate and standing;

والذين يقولون ربنا اصرف عنا عذاب جهنم إن عذابها كان غراما
Those who say, "Our Lord! avert from us the Wrath of Hell, for its Wrath is indeed an affliction grievous,-

إنها ساءت مستقرا ومقاما
"Evil indeed is it as an abode, and as a place to rest in";

والذين إذا أنفقوا لم يسرفوا ولم يقتروا وكان بين ذلك قواما
Those who, when they spend, are not extravagant and not niggardly, but hold a just (balance) between those (extremes);

والذين لا يدعون مع الله إلها آخر ولا يقتلون النفس التي حرم الله إلا بالحق ولا يزنون ومن يفعل ذلك يلق أثاما
Those who invoke not, with Allah, any other god, nor slay such life as Allah has made sacred except for just cause, nor commit fornication; - and any that does this (not only) meets punishment.

يضاعف له العذاب يوم القيامة ويخلد فيه مهانا
(But) the Penalty on the Day of Judgment will be doubled to him, and he will dwell therein in ignominy,-

إلا من تاب وآمن وعمل عملا صالحا فأولئك يبدل الله سيئاتهم حسنات وكان الله غفورا رحيما
Unless he repents, believes, and works righteous deeds, for Allah will change the evil of such persons into good, and Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful,

ومن تاب وعمل صالحا فإنه يتوب إلى الله متابا
And whoever repents and does good has truly turned to Allah with an (acceptable) conversion;-

والذين لا يشهدون الزور وإذا مروا باللغو مروا كراما
Those who witness no falsehood, and, if they pass by futility, they pass by it with honourable (avoidance);

والذين إذا ذكروا بآيات ربهم لم يخروا عليها صما وعميانا
Those who, when they are admonished with the Signs of their Lord, droop not down at them as if they were deaf or blind;

والذين يقولون ربنا هب لنا من أزواجنا وذرياتنا قرة أعين واجعلنا للمتقين إماما
And those who pray, "Our Lord! Grant unto us wives and offspring who will be the comfort of our eyes, and give us (the grace) to lead the righteous."

أولئك يجزون الغرفة بما صبروا ويلقون فيها تحية وسلاما
Those are the ones who will be rewarded with the highest place in heaven, because of their patient constancy: therein shall they be met with salutations and peace,

خالدين فيها حسنت مستقرا ومقاما
Dwelling therein;- how beautiful an abode and place of rest!

قل ما يعبأ بكم ربي لولا دعاؤكم فقد كذبتم فسوف يكون لزاما
Say (to the Rejecters): "My Lord is not uneasy because of you if ye call not on Him: But ye have indeed rejected (Him), and soon will come the inevitable (punishment)!"

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم طسم
Ta. Sin. Mim.

تلك آيات الكتاب المبين
These are verses of the Book that makes (things) clear.

لعلك باخع نفسك ألا يكونوا مؤمنين
It may be thou frettest thy soul with grief, that they do not become Believers.

إن نشأ ننزل عليهم من السماء آية فظلت أعناقهم لها خاضعين
If (such) were Our Will, We could send down to them from the sky a Sign, to which they would bend their necks in humility.

وما يأتيهم من ذكر من الرحمن محدث إلا كانوا عنه معرضين
But there comes not to them a newly-revealed Message from (Allah) Most Gracious, but they turn away therefrom.

فقد كذبوا فسيأتيهم أنباء ما كانوا به يستهزئون
They have indeed rejected (the Message): so they will know soon (enough) the truth of what they mocked at!

أولم يروا إلى الأرض كم أنبتنا فيها من كل زوج كريم
Do they not look at the earth,- how many noble things of all kinds We have produced therein?

إن في ذلك لآية وما كان أكثرهم مؤمنين
Verily, in this is a Sign: but most of them do not believe.

وإن ربك لهو العزيز الرحيم
And verily, thy Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.

وإذ نادى ربك موسى أن ائت القوم الظالمين
Behold, thy Lord called Moses: "Go to the people of iniquity,-

قوم فرعون ألا يتقون
"The people of the Pharaoh: will they not fear Allah?"

قال رب إني أخاف أن يكذبون
He said: "O my Lord! I do fear that they will charge me with falsehood:

ويضيق صدري ولا ينطلق لساني فأرسل إلى هارون
"My breast will be straitened. And my speech may not go (smoothly): so send unto Aaron.

ولهم علي ذنب فأخاف أن يقتلون
"And (further), they have a charge of crime against me; and I fear they may slay me."

قال كلا فاذهبا بآياتنا إنا معكم مستمعون
Allah said: "By no means! proceed then, both of you, with Our Signs; We are with you, and will listen (to your call).

فأتيا فرعون فقولا إنا رسول رب العالمين
"So go forth, both of you, to Pharaoh, and say: 'We have been sent by the Lord and Cherisher of the worlds;

أن أرسل معنا بني إسرائيل
"'Send thou with us the Children of Israel.'"

قال ألم نربك فينا وليدا ولبثت فينا من عمرك سنين
(Pharaoh) said: "Did we not cherish thee as a child among us, and didst thou not stay in our midst many years of thy life?

وفعلت فعلتك التي فعلت وأنت من الكافرين
"And thou didst a deed of thine which (thou knowest) thou didst, and thou art an ungrateful (wretch)!"

قال فعلتها إذا وأنا من الضالين
Moses said: "I did it then, when I was in error.

ففررت منكم لما خفتكم فوهب لي ربي حكما وجعلني من المرسلين
"So I fled from you (all) when I feared you; but my Lord has (since) invested me with judgment (and wisdom) and appointed me as one of the messengers.

وتلك نعمة تمنها علي أن عبدت بني إسرائيل
"And this is the favour with which thou dost reproach me,- that thou hast enslaved the Children of Israel!"

قال فرعون وما رب العالمين
Pharaoh said: "And what is the 'Lord and Cherisher of the worlds'?"

قال رب السماوات والأرض وما بينهما إن كنتم موقنين
(Moses) said: "The Lord and Cherisher of the heavens and the earth, and all between,- if ye want to be quite sure."

قال لمن حوله ألا تستمعون
(Pharaoh) said to those around: "Did ye not listen (to what he says)?"

قال ربكم ورب آبائكم الأولين
(Moses) said: "Your Lord and the Lord of your fathers from the beginning!"

قال إن رسولكم الذي أرسل إليكم لمجنون
(Pharaoh) said: "Truly your messenger who has been sent to you is a veritable madman!"

قال رب المشرق والمغرب وما بينهما إن كنتم تعقلون
(Moses) said: "Lord of the East and the West, and all between! if ye only had sense!"

قال لئن اتخذت إلها غيري لأجعلنك من المسجونين
(Pharaoh) said: "If thou dost put forward any god other than me, I will certainly put thee in prison!"

قال أولو جئتك بشيء مبين
(Moses) said: "Even if I showed you something clear (and) convincing?"

قال فأت به إن كنت من الصادقين
(Pharaoh) said: "Show it then, if thou tellest the truth!"

فألقى عصاه فإذا هي ثعبان مبين
So (Moses) threw his rod, and behold, it was a serpent, plain (for all to see)!

ونزع يده فإذا هي بيضاء للناظرين
And he drew out his hand, and behold, it was white to all beholders!

قال للملإ حوله إن هذا لساحر عليم
(Pharaoh) said to the Chiefs around him: "This is indeed a sorcerer well-versed:

يريد أن يخرجكم من أرضكم بسحره فماذا تأمرون
"His plan is to get you out of your land by his sorcery; then what is it ye counsel?"

قالوا أرجه وأخاه وابعث في المدائن حاشرين
They said: "Keep him and his brother in suspense (for a while), and dispatch to the Cities heralds to collect-

يأتوك بكل سحار عليم
"And bring up to thee all (our) sorcerers well-versed."

فجمع السحرة لميقات يوم معلوم
So the sorcerers were got together for the appointment of a day well-known,

وقيل للناس هل أنتم مجتمعون
And the people were told: "Are ye (now) assembled?-

لعلنا نتبع السحرة إن كانوا هم الغالبين
"That we may follow the sorcerers (in religion) if they win?"

فلما جاء السحرة قالوا لفرعون أئن لنا لأجرا إن كنا نحن الغالبين
So when the sorcerers arrived, they said to Pharaoh: "Of course - shall we have a (suitable) reward if we win?

قال نعم وإنكم إذا لمن المقربين
He said: "Yea, (and more),- for ye shall in that case be (raised to posts) nearest (to my person)."

قال لهم موسى ألقوا ما أنتم ملقون
Moses said to them: "Throw ye - that which ye are about to throw!"

فألقوا حبالهم وعصيهم وقالوا بعزة فرعون إنا لنحن الغالبون
So they threw their ropes and their rods, and said: "By the might of Pharaoh, it is we who will certainly win!"

فألقى موسى عصاه فإذا هي تلقف ما يأفكون
Then Moses threw his rod, when, behold, it straightway swallows up all the falsehoods which they fake!

فألقي السحرة ساجدين
Then did the sorcerers fall down, prostrate in adoration,

قالوا آمنا برب العالمين
Saying: "We believe in the Lord of the Worlds,

رب موسى وهارون
"The Lord of Moses and Aaron."

قال آمنتم له قبل أن آذن لكم إنه لكبيركم الذي علمكم السحر فلسوف تعلمون لأقطعن أيديكم وأرجلكم من خلاف ولأصلبنكم أجمعين
Said (Pharaoh): "Believe ye in Him before I give you permission? surely he is your leader, who has taught you sorcery! but soon shall ye know! Be sure I will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides, and I will cause you all to die on the cross!"

قالوا لا ضير إنا إلى ربنا منقلبون
They said: "No matter! for us, we shall but return to our Lord!

إنا نطمع أن يغفر لنا ربنا خطايانا أن كنا أول المؤمنين
"Only, our desire is that our Lord will forgive us our faults, that we may become foremost among the believers!"

وأوحينا إلى موسى أن أسر بعبادي إنكم متبعون
By inspiration we told Moses: "Travel by night with my servants; for surely ye shall be pursued."

فأرسل فرعون في المدائن حاشرين
Then Pharaoh sent heralds to (all) the Cities,

إن هؤلاء لشرذمة قليلون
(Saying): "These (Israelites) are but a small band,

وإنهم لنا لغائظون
"And they are raging furiously against us;

وإنا لجميع حاذرون
"But we are a multitude amply fore-warned."

فأخرجناهم من جنات وعيون
So We expelled them from gardens, springs,

وكنوز ومقام كريم
Treasures, and every kind of honourable position;

كذلك وأورثناها بني إسرائيل
Thus it was, but We made the Children of Israel inheritors of such things.

فأتبعوهم مشرقين
So they pursued them at sunrise.

فلما تراءى الجمعان قال أصحاب موسى إنا لمدركون
And when the two bodies saw each other, the people of Moses said: "We are sure to be overtaken."

قال كلا إن معي ربي سيهدين
(Moses) said: "By no means! my Lord is with me! Soon will He guide me!"

فأوحينا إلى موسى أن اضرب بعصاك البحر فانفلق فكان كل فرق كالطود العظيم
Then We told Moses by inspiration: "Strike the sea with thy rod." So it divided, and each separate part became like the huge, firm mass of a mountain.

وأزلفنا ثم الآخرين
And We made the other party approach thither.

وأنجينا موسى ومن معه أجمعين
We delivered Moses and all who were with him;

ثم أغرقنا الآخرين
But We drowned the others.

إن في ذلك لآية وما كان أكثرهم مؤمنين
Verily in this is a Sign: but most of them do not believe.

وإن ربك لهو العزيز الرحيم
And verily thy Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.

واتل عليهم نبأ إبراهيم
And rehearse to them (something of) Abraham's story.

إذ قال لأبيه وقومه ما تعبدون
Behold, he said to his father and his people: "What worship ye?"

قالوا نعبد أصناما فنظل لها عاكفين
They said: "We worship idols, and we remain constantly in attendance on them."

قال هل يسمعونكم إذ تدعون
He said: "Do they listen to you when ye call (on them)?"

أو ينفعونكم أو يضرون
"Or do you good or harm?"

قالوا بل وجدنا آباءنا كذلك يفعلون
They said: "Nay, but we found our fathers doing thus (what we do)."

قال أفرأيتم ما كنتم تعبدون
He said: "Do ye then see whom ye have been worshipping,-

أنتم وآباؤكم الأقدمون
"Ye and your fathers before you?-

فإنهم عدو لي إلا رب العالمين
"For they are enemies to me; not so the Lord and Cherisher of the Worlds;

الذي خلقني فهو يهدين
"Who created me, and it is He Who guides me;

والذي هو يطعمني ويسقين
"Who gives me food and drink,

وإذا مرضت فهو يشفين
"And when I am ill, it is He Who cures me;

والذي يميتني ثم يحيين
"Who will cause me to die, and then to life (again);

والذي أطمع أن يغفر لي خطيئتي يوم الدين
"And who, I hope, will forgive me my faults on the day of Judgment.

رب هب لي حكما وألحقني بالصالحين
"O my Lord! bestow wisdom on me, and join me with the righteous;

واجعل لي لسان صدق في الآخرين
"Grant me honourable mention on the tongue of truth among the latest (generations);

واجعلني من ورثة جنة النعيم
"Make me one of the inheritors of the Garden of Bliss;

واغفر لأبي إنه كان من الضالين
"Forgive my father, for that he is among those astray;

ولا تخزني يوم يبعثون
"And let me not be in disgrace on the Day when (men) will be raised up;-

يوم لا ينفع مال ولا بنون
"The Day whereon neither wealth nor sons will avail,

إلا من أتى الله بقلب سليم
"But only he (will prosper) that brings to Allah a sound heart;

وأزلفت الجنة للمتقين
"To the righteous, the Garden will be brought near,

وبرزت الجحيم للغاوين
"And to those straying in Evil, the Fire will be placed in full view;

وقيل لهم أين ما كنتم تعبدون
"And it shall be said to them: 'Where are the (gods) ye worshipped-

من دون الله هل ينصرونكم أو ينتصرون
"'Besides Allah? Can they help you or help themselves?'

فكبكبوا فيها هم والغاوون
"Then they will be thrown headlong into the (Fire),- they and those straying in Evil,

وجنود إبليس أجمعون
"And the whole hosts of Iblis together.

قالوا وهم فيها يختصمون
"They will say there in their mutual bickerings:

تالله إن كنا لفي ضلال مبين
"'By Allah, we were truly in an error manifest,

إذ نسويكم برب العالمين
"'When we held you as equals with the Lord of the Worlds;

وما أضلنا إلا المجرمون
"'And our seducers were only those who were steeped in guilt.

فما لنا من شافعين
"'Now, then, we have none to intercede (for us),

ولا صديق حميم
"'Nor a single friend to feel (for us).

فلو أن لنا كرة فنكون من المؤمنين
"'Now if we only had a chance of return we shall truly be of those who believe!'"

إن في ذلك لآية وما كان أكثرهم مؤمنين
Verily in this is a Sign but most of them do not believe.

وإن ربك لهو العزيز الرحيم
And verily thy Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.

كذبت قوم نوح المرسلين
The people of Noah rejected the messengers.

إذ قال لهم أخوهم نوح ألا تتقون
Behold, their brother Noah said to them: "Will ye not fear (Allah)?

إني لكم رسول أمين
"I am to you a messenger worthy of all trust:

فاتقوا الله وأطيعون
"So fear Allah, and obey me.

وما أسألكم عليه من أجر إن أجري إلا على رب العالمين
"No reward do I ask of you for it: my reward is only from the Lord of the Worlds:

فاتقوا الله وأطيعون
"So fear Allah, and obey me."

قالوا أنؤمن لك واتبعك الأرذلون
They said: "Shall we believe in thee when it is the meanest that follow thee?"

قال وما علمي بما كانوا يعملون
He said: "And what do I know as to what they do?

إن حسابهم إلا على ربي لو تشعرون
"Their account is only with my Lord, if ye could (but) understand.

وما أنا بطارد المؤمنين
"I am not one to drive away those who believe.

إن أنا إلا نذير مبين
"I am sent only to warn plainly in public."

قالوا لئن لم تنته يا نوح لتكونن من المرجومين
They said: "If thou desist not, O Noah! thou shalt be stoned (to death)."

قال رب إن قومي كذبون
He said: "O my Lord! truly my people have rejected me.

فافتح بيني وبينهم فتحا ونجني ومن معي من المؤمنين
"Judge Thou, then, between me and them openly, and deliver me and those of the Believers who are with me."

فأنجيناه ومن معه في الفلك المشحون
So We delivered him and those with him, in the Ark filled (with all creatures).

ثم أغرقنا بعد الباقين
Thereafter We drowned those who remained behind.

إن في ذلك لآية وما كان أكثرهم مؤمنين
Verily in this is a Sign: but most of them do not believe.

وإن ربك لهو العزيز الرحيم
And verily thy Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.

كذبت عاد المرسلين
The 'Ad (people) rejected the messengers.

إذ قال لهم أخوهم هود ألا تتقون
Behold, their brother Hud said to them: "Will ye not fear (Allah)?

إني لكم رسول أمين
"I am to you a messenger worthy of all trust:

فاتقوا الله وأطيعون
"So fear Allah and obey me.

وما أسألكم عليه من أجر إن أجري إلا على رب العالمين
"No reward do I ask of you for it: my reward is only from the Lord of the Worlds.

أتبنون بكل ريع آية تعبثون
"Do ye build a landmark on every high place to amuse yourselves?

وتتخذون مصانع لعلكم تخلدون
"And do ye get for yourselves fine buildings in the hope of living therein (for ever)?

وإذا بطشتم بطشتم جبارين
"And when ye exert your strong hand, do ye do it like men of absolute power?

فاتقوا الله وأطيعون
"Now fear Allah, and obey me.

واتقوا الذي أمدكم بما تعلمون
"Yea, fear Him Who has bestowed on you freely all that ye know.

أمدكم بأنعام وبنين
"Freely has He bestowed on you cattle and sons,-

وجنات وعيون
"And Gardens and Springs.

إني أخاف عليكم عذاب يوم عظيم
"Truly I fear for you the Penalty of a Great Day."

قالوا سواء علينا أوعظت أم لم تكن من الواعظين
They said: "It is the same to us whether thou admonish us or be not among (our) admonishers!

إن هذا إلا خلق الأولين
"This is no other than a customary device of the ancients,

وما نحن بمعذبين
"And we are not the ones to receive Pains and Penalties!"

فكذبوه فأهلكناهم إن في ذلك لآية وما كان أكثرهم مؤمنين
So they rejected him, and We destroyed them. Verily in this is a Sign: but most of them do not believe.

وإن ربك لهو العزيز الرحيم
And verily thy Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.

كذبت ثمود المرسلين
The Thamud (people) rejected the messengers.

إذ قال لهم أخوهم صالح ألا تتقون
Behold, their brother Salih said to them: "Will you not fear (Allah)?

إني لكم رسول أمين
"I am to you a messenger worthy of all trust.

فاتقوا الله وأطيعون
"So fear Allah, and obey me.

وما أسألكم عليه من أجر إن أجري إلا على رب العالمين
"No reward do I ask of you for it: my reward is only from the Lord of the Worlds.

أتتركون في ما هاهنا آمنين
"Will ye be left secure, in (the enjoyment of) all that ye have here?-

في جنات وعيون
"Gardens and Springs,

وزروع ونخل طلعها هضيم
"And corn-fields and date-palms with spathes near breaking (with the weight of fruit)?

وتنحتون من الجبال بيوتا فارهين
"And ye carve houses out of (rocky) mountains with great skill.

فاتقوا الله وأطيعون
"But fear Allah and obey me;

ولا تطيعوا أمر المسرفين
"And follow not the bidding of those who are extravagant,-

الذين يفسدون في الأرض ولا يصلحون
"Who make mischief in the land, and mend not (their ways)."

قالوا إنما أنت من المسحرين
They said: "Thou art only one of those bewitched!

ما أنت إلا بشر مثلنا فأت بآية إن كنت من الصادقين
"Thou art no more than a mortal like us: then bring us a Sign, if thou tellest the truth!"

قال هذه ناقة لها شرب ولكم شرب يوم معلوم
He said: "Here is a she-camel: she has a right of watering, and ye have a right of watering, (severally) on a day appointed.

ولا تمسوها بسوء فيأخذكم عذاب يوم عظيم
"Touch her not with harm, lest the Penalty of a Great Day seize you."

فعقروها فأصبحوا نادمين
But they ham-strung her: then did they become full of regrets.

فأخذهم العذاب إن في ذلك لآية وما كان أكثرهم مؤمنين
But the Penalty seized them. Verily in this is a Sign: but most of them do not believe.

وإن ربك لهو العزيز الرحيم
And verily thy Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.

كذبت قوم لوط المرسلين
The people of Lut rejected the messengers.

إذ قال لهم أخوهم لوط ألا تتقون
Behold, their brother Lut said to them: "Will ye not fear (Allah)?

إني لكم رسول أمين
"I am to you a messenger worthy of all trust.

فاتقوا الله وأطيعون
"So fear Allah and obey me.

وما أسألكم عليه من أجر إن أجري إلا على رب العالمين
"No reward do I ask of you for it: my reward is only from the lord of the Worlds.

أتأتون الذكران من العالمين
"Of all the creatures in the world, will ye approach males,

وتذرون ما خلق لكم ربكم من أزواجكم بل أنتم قوم عادون
"And leave those whom Allah has created for you to be your mates? Nay, ye are a people transgressing (all limits)!"

قالوا لئن لم تنته يا لوط لتكونن من المخرجين
They said: "If thou desist not, O Lut! thou wilt assuredly be cast out!"

قال إني لعملكم من القالين
He said: "I do detest your doings."

رب نجني وأهلي مما يعملون
"O my Lord! deliver me and my family from such things as they do!"

فنجيناه وأهله أجمعين
So We delivered him and his family,- all

إلا عجوزا في الغابرين
Except an old woman who lingered behind.

ثم دمرنا الآخرين
But the rest We destroyed utterly.

وأمطرنا عليهم مطرا فساء مطر المنذرين
We rained down on them a shower (of brimstone): and evil was the shower on those who were admonished (but heeded not)!

إن في ذلك لآية وما كان أكثرهم مؤمنين
Verily in this is a Sign: but most of them do not believe.

وإن ربك لهو العزيز الرحيم
And verily thy Lord is He, the Exalted in Might Most Merciful.

كذب أصحاب الأيكة المرسلين
The Companions of the Wood rejected the messengers.

إذ قال لهم شعيب ألا تتقون
Behold, Shu'aib said to them: "Will ye not fear (Allah)?

إني لكم رسول أمين
"I am to you a messenger worthy of all trust.

فاتقوا الله وأطيعون
"So fear Allah and obey me.

وما أسألكم عليه من أجر إن أجري إلا على رب العالمين
"No reward do I ask of you for it: my reward is only from the Lord of the Worlds.

أوفوا الكيل ولا تكونوا من المخسرين
"Give just measure, and cause no loss (to others by fraud).

وزنوا بالقسطاس المستقيم
"And weigh with scales true and upright.

ولا تبخسوا الناس أشياءهم ولا تعثوا في الأرض مفسدين
"And withhold not things justly due to men, nor do evil in the land, working mischief.

واتقوا الذي خلقكم والجبلة الأولين
"And fear Him Who created you and (who created) the generations before (you)"

قالوا إنما أنت من المسحرين
They said: "Thou art only one of those bewitched!

وما أنت إلا بشر مثلنا وإن نظنك لمن الكاذبين
"Thou art no more than a mortal like us, and indeed we think thou art a liar!

فأسقط علينا كسفا من السماء إن كنت من الصادقين
"Now cause a piece of the sky to fall on us, if thou art truthful!"

قال ربي أعلم بما تعملون
He said: "My Lord knows best what ye do."

فكذبوه فأخذهم عذاب يوم الظلة إنه كان عذاب يوم عظيم
But they rejected him. Then the punishment of a day of overshadowing gloom seized them, and that was the Penalty of a Great Day.

إن في ذلك لآية وما كان أكثرهم مؤمنين
Verily in that is a Sign: but most of them do not believe.

وإن ربك لهو العزيز الرحيم
And verily thy Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.

وإنه لتنزيل رب العالمين
Verily this is a Revelation from the Lord of the Worlds:

نزل به الروح الأمين
With it came down the spirit of Faith and Truth-

على قلبك لتكون من المنذرين
To thy heart and mind, that thou mayest admonish.

بلسان عربي مبين
In the perspicuous Arabic tongue.

وإنه لفي زبر الأولين
Without doubt it is (announced) in the mystic Books of former peoples.

أولم يكن لهم آية أن يعلمه علماء بني إسرائيل
Is it not a Sign to them that the Learned of the Children of Israel knew it (as true)?

ولو نزلناه على بعض الأعجمين
Had We revealed it to any of the non-Arabs,

فقرأه عليهم ما كانوا به مؤمنين
And had he recited it to them, they would not have believed in it.

كذلك سلكناه في قلوب المجرمين
Thus have We caused it to enter the hearts of the sinners.

لا يؤمنون به حتى يروا العذاب الأليم
They will not believe in it until they see the grievous Penalty;

فيأتيهم بغتة وهم لا يشعرون
But the (Penalty) will come to them of a sudden, while they perceive it not;

فيقولوا هل نحن منظرون
Then they will say: "Shall we be respited?"

أفبعذابنا يستعجلون
Do they then ask for Our Penalty to be hastened on?

أفرأيت إن متعناهم سنين
Seest thou? If We do let them enjoy (this life) for a few years,

ثم جاءهم ما كانوا يوعدون
Yet there comes to them at length the (Punishment) which they were promised!

ما أغنى عنهم ما كانوا يمتعون
It will profit them not that they enjoyed (this life)!

وما أهلكنا من قرية إلا لها منذرون
Never did We destroy a population, but had its warners -

ذكرى وما كنا ظالمين
By way of reminder; and We never are unjust.

وما تنزلت به الشياطين
No evil ones have brought down this (Revelation):

وما ينبغي لهم وما يستطيعون
It would neither suit them nor would they be able (to produce it).

إنهم عن السمع لمعزولون
Indeed they have been removed far from even (a chance of) hearing it.

فلا تدع مع الله إلها آخر فتكون من المعذبين
So call not on any other god with Allah, or thou wilt be among those under the Penalty.

وأنذر عشيرتك الأقربين
And admonish thy nearest kinsmen,

واخفض جناحك لمن اتبعك من المؤمنين
And lower thy wing to the Believers who follow thee.

فإن عصوك فقل إني بريء مما تعملون
Then if they disobey thee, say: "I am free (of responsibility) for what ye do!"

وتوكل على العزيز الرحيم
And put thy trust on the Exalted in Might, the Merciful,-

الذي يراك حين تقوم
Who seeth thee standing forth (in prayer),

وتقلبك في الساجدين
And thy movements among those who prostrate themselves,

إنه هو السميع العليم
For it is He Who heareth and knoweth all things.

هل أنبئكم على من تنزل الشياطين
Shall I inform you, (O people!), on whom it is that the evil ones descend?

تنزل على كل أفاك أثيم
They descend on every lying, wicked person,

يلقون السمع وأكثرهم كاذبون
(Into whose ears) they pour hearsay vanities, and most of them are liars.

والشعراء يتبعهم الغاوون
And the Poets,- It is those straying in Evil, who follow them:

ألم تر أنهم في كل واد يهيمون
Seest thou not that they wander distracted in every valley?-

وأنهم يقولون ما لا يفعلون
And that they say what they practise not?-

إلا الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات وذكروا الله كثيرا وانتصروا من بعد ما ظلموا وسيعلم الذين ظلموا أي منقلب ينقلبون
Except those who believe, work righteousness, engage much in the remembrance of Allah, and defend themselves only after they are unjustly attacked. And soon will the unjust assailants know what vicissitudes their affairs will take!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم طس تلك آيات القرآن وكتاب مبين
These are verses of the Qur'an,-a book that makes (things) clear;

هدى وبشرى للمؤمنين
A guide: and glad tidings for the believers,-

الذين يقيمون الصلاة ويؤتون الزكاة وهم بالآخرة هم يوقنون
Those who establish regular prayers and give in regular charity, and also have (full) assurance of the hereafter.

إن الذين لا يؤمنون بالآخرة زينا لهم أعمالهم فهم يعمهون
As to those who believe not in the Hereafter, We have made their deeds pleasing in their eyes; and so they wander about in distraction.

أولئك الذين لهم سوء العذاب وهم في الآخرة هم الأخسرون
Such are they for whom a grievous Penalty is (waiting); and in the Hereafter theirs will be the greatest loss.

وإنك لتلقى القرآن من لدن حكيم عليم
As to thee, the Qur'an is bestowed upon thee from the presence of one who is wise and all-knowing.

إذ قال موسى لأهله إني آنست نارا سآتيكم منها بخبر أو آتيكم بشهاب قبس لعلكم تصطلون
Behold! Moses said to his family: "I perceive a fire; soon will I bring you from there some information, or I will bring you a burning brand to light our fuel, that ye may warm yourselves.

فلما جاءها نودي أن بورك من في النار ومن حولها وسبحان الله رب العالمين
But when he came to the (fire), a voice was heard: "Blessed are those in the fire and those around: and glory to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.

يا موسى إنه أنا الله العزيز الحكيم
"O Moses! verily, I am Allah, the exalted in might, the wise!....

وألق عصاك فلما رآها تهتز كأنها جان ولى مدبرا ولم يعقب يا موسى لا تخف إني لا يخاف لدي المرسلون
"Now do thou throw thy rod!" But when he saw it moving (of its own accord) as if it had been a snake, he turned back in retreat, and retraced not his steps: "O Moses!" (it was said), "Fear not: truly, in My presence, those called as messengers have no fear,-

إلا من ظلم ثم بدل حسنا بعد سوء فإني غفور رحيم
"But if any have done wrong and have thereafter substituted good to take the place of evil, truly, I am Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

وأدخل يدك في جيبك تخرج بيضاء من غير سوء في تسع آيات إلى فرعون وقومه إنهم كانوا قوما فاسقين
"Now put thy hand into thy bosom, and it will come forth white without stain (or harm): (these are) among the nine Signs (thou wilt take) to Pharaoh and his people: for they are a people rebellious in transgression."

فلما جاءتهم آياتنا مبصرة قالوا هذا سحر مبين
But when Our Signs came to them, that should have opened their eyes, they said: "This is sorcery manifest!"

وجحدوا بها واستيقنتها أنفسهم ظلما وعلوا فانظر كيف كان عاقبة المفسدين
And they rejected those Signs in iniquity and arrogance, though their souls were convinced thereof: so see what was the end of those who acted corruptly!

ولقد آتينا داوود وسليمان علما وقالا الحمد لله الذي فضلنا على كثير من عباده المؤمنين
We gave (in the past) knowledge to David and Solomon: And they both said: "Praise be to Allah, Who has favoured us above many of his servants who believe!"

وورث سليمان داوود وقال يا أيها الناس علمنا منطق الطير وأوتينا من كل شيء إن هذا لهو الفضل المبين
And Solomon was David's heir. He said: "O ye people! We have been taught the speech of birds, and on us has been bestowed (a little) of all things: this is indeed Grace manifest (from Allah.)"

وحشر لسليمان جنوده من الجن والإنس والطير فهم يوزعون
And before Solomon were marshalled his hosts,- of Jinns and men and birds, and they were all kept in order and ranks.

حتى إذا أتوا على واد النمل قالت نملة يا أيها النمل ادخلوا مساكنكم لا يحطمنكم سليمان وجنوده وهم لا يشعرون
At length, when they came to a (lowly) valley of ants, one of the ants said: "O ye ants, get into your habitations, lest Solomon and his hosts crush you (under foot) without knowing it."

فتبسم ضاحكا من قولها وقال رب أوزعني أن أشكر نعمتك التي أنعمت علي وعلى والدي وأن أعمل صالحا ترضاه وأدخلني برحمتك في عبادك الصالحين
So he smiled, amused at her speech; and he said: "O my Lord! so order me that I may be grateful for Thy favours, which thou hast bestowed on me and on my parents, and that I may work the righteousness that will please Thee: And admit me, by Thy Grace, to the ranks of Thy righteous Servants."

وتفقد الطير فقال ما لي لا أرى الهدهد أم كان من الغائبين
And he took a muster of the Birds; and he said: "Why is it I see not the Hoopoe? Or is he among the absentees?

لأعذبنه عذابا شديدا أو لأذبحنه أو ليأتيني بسلطان مبين
"I will certainly punish him with a severe penalty, or execute him, unless he bring me a clear reason (for absence)."

فمكث غير بعيد فقال أحطت بما لم تحط به وجئتك من سبإ بنبإ يقين
But the Hoopoe tarried not far: he (came up and) said: "I have compassed (territory) which thou hast not compassed, and I have come to thee from Saba with tidings true.

إني وجدت امرأة تملكهم وأوتيت من كل شيء ولها عرش عظيم
"I found (there) a woman ruling over them and provided with every requisite; and she has a magnificent throne.

وجدتها وقومها يسجدون للشمس من دون الله وزين لهم الشيطان أعمالهم فصدهم عن السبيل فهم لا يهتدون
"I found her and her people worshipping the sun besides Allah: Satan has made their deeds seem pleasing in their eyes, and has kept them away from the Path,- so they receive no guidance,-

ألا يسجدوا لله الذي يخرج الخبء في السماوات والأرض ويعلم ما تخفون وما تعلنون
"(Kept them away from the Path), that they should not worship Allah, Who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth, and knows what ye hide and what ye reveal.

الله لا إله إلا هو رب العرش العظيم
"Allah!- there is no god but He!- Lord of the Throne Supreme!"

قال سننظر أصدقت أم كنت من الكاذبين
(Solomon) said: "Soon shall we see whether thou hast told the truth or lied!

اذهب بكتابي هذا فألقه إليهم ثم تول عنهم فانظر ماذا يرجعون
"Go thou, with this letter of mine, and deliver it to them: then draw back from them, and (wait to) see what answer they return"...

قالت يا أيها الملأ إني ألقي إلي كتاب كريم
(The queen) said: "Ye chiefs! here is delivered to me - a letter worthy of respect.

إنه من سليمان وإنه بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
"It is from Solomon, and is (as follows): 'In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful:

ألا تعلوا علي وأتوني مسلمين
"'Be ye not arrogant against me, but come to me in submission (to the true Religion).'"

قالت يا أيها الملأ أفتوني في أمري ما كنت قاطعة أمرا حتى تشهدون
She said: "Ye chiefs! advise me in (this) my affair: no affair have I decided except in your presence."

قالوا نحن أولو قوة وأولو بأس شديد والأمر إليك فانظري ماذا تأمرين
They said: "We are endued with strength, and given to vehement war: but the command is with thee; so consider what thou wilt command."

قالت إن الملوك إذا دخلوا قرية أفسدوها وجعلوا أعزة أهلها أذلة وكذلك يفعلون
She said: "Kings, when they enter a country, despoil it, and make the noblest of its people its meanest thus do they behave.

وإني مرسلة إليهم بهدية فناظرة بم يرجع المرسلون
"But I am going to send him a present, and (wait) to see with what (answer) return (my) ambassadors."

فلما جاء سليمان قال أتمدونن بمال فما آتاني الله خير مما آتاكم بل أنتم بهديتكم تفرحون
Now when (the embassy) came to Solomon, he said: "Will ye give me abundance in wealth? But that which Allah has given me is better than that which He has given you! Nay it is ye who rejoice in your gift!

ارجع إليهم فلنأتينهم بجنود لا قبل لهم بها ولنخرجنهم منها أذلة وهم صاغرون
"Go back to them, and be sure we shall come to them with such hosts as they will never be able to meet: We shall expel them from there in disgrace, and they will feel humbled (indeed)."

قال يا أيها الملأ أيكم يأتيني بعرشها قبل أن يأتوني مسلمين
He said (to his own men): "Ye chiefs! which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me in submission?"

قال عفريت من الجن أنا آتيك به قبل أن تقوم من مقامك وإني عليه لقوي أمين
Said an 'Ifrit, of the Jinns: "I will bring it to thee before thou rise from thy council: indeed I have full strength for the purpose, and may be trusted."

قال الذي عنده علم من الكتاب أنا آتيك به قبل أن يرتد إليك طرفك فلما رآه مستقرا عنده قال هذا من فضل ربي ليبلوني أأشكر أم أكفر ومن شكر فإنما يشكر لنفسه ومن كفر فإن ربي غني كريم
Said one who had knowledge of the Book: "I will bring it to thee within the twinkling of an eye!" Then when (Solomon) saw it placed firmly before him, he said: "This is by the Grace of my Lord!- to test me whether I am grateful or ungrateful! and if any is grateful, truly his gratitude is (a gain) for his own soul; but if any is ungrateful, truly my Lord is Free of all Needs, Supreme in Honour!"

قال نكروا لها عرشها ننظر أتهتدي أم تكون من الذين لا يهتدون
He said: "Transform her throne out of all recognition by her: let us see whether she is guided (to the truth) or is one of those who receive no guidance."

فلما جاءت قيل أهكذا عرشك قالت كأنه هو وأوتينا العلم من قبلها وكنا مسلمين
So when she arrived, she was asked, "Is this thy throne?" She said, "It was just like this; and knowledge was bestowed on us in advance of this, and we have submitted to Allah (in Islam)."

وصدها ما كانت تعبد من دون الله إنها كانت من قوم كافرين
And he diverted her from the worship of others besides Allah: for she was (sprung) of a people that had no faith.

قيل لها ادخلي الصرح فلما رأته حسبته لجة وكشفت عن ساقيها قال إنه صرح ممرد من قوارير قالت رب إني ظلمت نفسي وأسلمت مع سليمان لله رب العالمين
She was asked to enter the lofty Palace: but when she saw it, she thought it was a lake of water, and she (tucked up her skirts), uncovering her legs. He said: "This is but a palace paved smooth with slabs of glass." She said: "O my Lord! I have indeed wronged my soul: I do (now) submit (in Islam), with Solomon, to the Lord of the Worlds."

ولقد أرسلنا إلى ثمود أخاهم صالحا أن اعبدوا الله فإذا هم فريقان يختصمون
We sent (aforetime), to the Thamud, their brother Salih, saying, "Serve Allah": But behold, they became two factions quarrelling with each other.

قال يا قوم لم تستعجلون بالسيئة قبل الحسنة لولا تستغفرون الله لعلكم ترحمون
He said: "O my people! why ask ye to hasten on the evil in preference to the good? If only ye ask Allah for forgiveness, ye may hope to receive mercy.

قالوا اطيرنا بك وبمن معك قال طائركم عند الله بل أنتم قوم تفتنون
They said: "Ill omen do we augur from thee and those that are with thee". He said: "Your ill omen is with Allah; yea, ye are a people under trial."

وكان في المدينة تسعة رهط يفسدون في الأرض ولا يصلحون
There were in the city nine men of a family, who made mischief in the land, and would not reform.

قالوا تقاسموا بالله لنبيتنه وأهله ثم لنقولن لوليه ما شهدنا مهلك أهله وإنا لصادقون
They said: "Swear a mutual oath by Allah that we shall make a secret night attack on him and his people, and that we shall then say to his heir (when he seeks vengeance): 'We were not present at the slaughter of his people, and we are positively telling the truth.'"

ومكروا مكرا ومكرنا مكرا وهم لا يشعرون
They plotted and planned, but We too planned, even while they perceived it not.

فانظر كيف كان عاقبة مكرهم أنا دمرناهم وقومهم أجمعين
Then see what was the end of their plot!- this, that We destroyed them and their people, all (of them).

فتلك بيوتهم خاوية بما ظلموا إن في ذلك لآية لقوم يعلمون
Now such were their houses, - in utter ruin, - because they practised wrong-doing. Verily in this is a Sign for people of knowledge.

وأنجينا الذين آمنوا وكانوا يتقون
And We saved those who believed and practised righteousness.

ولوطا إذ قال لقومه أتأتون الفاحشة وأنتم تبصرون
(We also sent) Lut (as a messenger): behold, He said to his people, "Do ye do what is shameful though ye see (its iniquity)?

أئنكم لتأتون الرجال شهوة من دون النساء بل أنتم قوم تجهلون
Would ye really approach men in your lusts rather than women? Nay, ye are a people (grossly) ignorant!

فما كان جواب قومه إلا أن قالوا أخرجوا آل لوط من قريتكم إنهم أناس يتطهرون
But his people gave no other answer but this: they said, "Drive out the followers of Lut from your city: these are indeed men who want to be clean and pure!"

فأنجيناه وأهله إلا امرأته قدرناها من الغابرين
But We saved him and his family, except his wife; her We destined to be of those who lagged behind.

وأمطرنا عليهم مطرا فساء مطر المنذرين
And We rained down on them a shower (of brimstone): and evil was the shower on those who were admonished (but heeded not)!

قل الحمد لله وسلام على عباده الذين اصطفى آلله خير أما يشركون
Say: Praise be to Allah, and Peace on his servants whom He has chosen (for his Message). (Who) is better?- Allah or the false gods they associate (with Him)?

أمن خلق السماوات والأرض وأنزل لكم من السماء ماء فأنبتنا به حدائق ذات بهجة ما كان لكم أن تنبتوا شجرها أإله مع الله بل هم قوم يعدلون
Or, Who has created the heavens and the earth, and Who sends you down rain from the sky? Yea, with it We cause to grow well-planted orchards full of beauty of delight: it is not in your power to cause the growth of the trees in them. (Can there be another) god besides Allah? Nay, they are a people who swerve from justice.

أمن جعل الأرض قرارا وجعل خلالها أنهارا وجعل لها رواسي وجعل بين البحرين حاجزا أإله مع الله بل أكثرهم لا يعلمون
Or, Who has made the earth firm to live in; made rivers in its midst; set thereon mountains immovable; and made a separating bar between the two bodies of flowing water? (can there be another) god besides Allah? Nay, most of them know not.

أمن يجيب المضطر إذا دعاه ويكشف السوء ويجعلكم خلفاء الأرض أإله مع الله قليلا ما تذكرون
Or, Who listens to the (soul) distressed when it calls on Him, and Who relieves its suffering, and makes you (mankind) inheritors of the earth? (Can there be another) god besides Allah? Little it is that ye heed!

أمن يهديكم في ظلمات البر والبحر ومن يرسل الرياح بشرا بين يدي رحمته أإله مع الله تعالى الله عما يشركون
Or, Who guides you through the depths of darkness on land and sea, and Who sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings, going before His Mercy? (Can there be another) god besides Allah?- High is Allah above what they associate with Him!

أمن يبدأ الخلق ثم يعيده ومن يرزقكم من السماء والأرض أإله مع الله قل هاتوا برهانكم إن كنتم صادقين
Or, Who originates creation, then repeats it, and who gives you sustenance from heaven and earth? (Can there be another) god besides Allah? Say, "Bring forth your argument, if ye are telling the truth!"

قل لا يعلم من في السماوات والأرض الغيب إلا الله وما يشعرون أيان يبعثون
Say: None in the heavens or on earth, except Allah, knows what is hidden: nor can they perceive when they shall be raised up (for Judgment).

بل ادارك علمهم في الآخرة بل هم في شك منها بل هم منها عمون
Still less can their knowledge comprehend the Hereafter: Nay, they are in doubt and uncertainty thereanent; nay, they are blind thereunto!

وقال الذين كفروا أإذا كنا ترابا وآباؤنا أئنا لمخرجون
The Unbelievers say: "What! when we become dust,- we and our fathers,- shall we really be raised (from the dead)?

لقد وعدنا هذا نحن وآباؤنا من قبل إن هذا إلا أساطير الأولين
"It is true we were promised this,- we and our fathers before (us): these are nothing but tales of the ancients."

قل سيروا في الأرض فانظروا كيف كان عاقبة المجرمين
Say: "Go ye through the earth and see what has been the end of those guilty (of sin)."

ولا تحزن عليهم ولا تكن في ضيق مما يمكرون
But grieve not over them, nor distress thyself because of their plots.

ويقولون متى هذا الوعد إن كنتم صادقين
They also say: "When will this promise (come to pass)? (Say) if ye are truthful."

قل عسى أن يكون ردف لكم بعض الذي تستعجلون
Say: "It may be that some of the events which ye wish to hasten on may be (close) in your pursuit!"

وإن ربك لذو فضل على الناس ولكن أكثرهم لا يشكرون
But verily thy Lord is full of grace to mankind: Yet most of them are ungrateful.

وإن ربك ليعلم ما تكن صدورهم وما يعلنون
And verily thy Lord knoweth all that their hearts do hide. As well as all that they reveal.

وما من غائبة في السماء والأرض إلا في كتاب مبين
Nor is there aught of the unseen, in heaven or earth, but is (recorded) in a clear record.

إن هذا القرآن يقص على بني إسرائيل أكثر الذي هم فيه يختلفون
Verily this Qur'an doth explain to the Children of Israel most of the matters in which they disagree.

وإنه لهدى ورحمة للمؤمنين
And it certainly is a Guide and a Mercy to those who believe.

إن ربك يقضي بينهم بحكمه وهو العزيز العليم
Verily thy Lord will decide between them by His Decree: and He is Exalted in Might, All-Knowing.

فتوكل على الله إنك على الحق المبين
So put thy trust in Allah: for thou art on (the path of) manifest Truth.

إنك لا تسمع الموتى ولا تسمع الصم الدعاء إذا ولوا مدبرين
Truly thou canst not cause the dead to listen, nor canst thou cause the deaf to hear the call, (especially) when they turn back in retreat.

وما أنت بهادي العمي عن ضلالتهم إن تسمع إلا من يؤمن بآياتنا فهم مسلمون
Nor canst thou be a guide to the blind, (to prevent them) from straying: only those wilt thou get to listen who believe in Our Signs, and they will bow in Islam.

وإذا وقع القول عليهم أخرجنا لهم دابة من الأرض تكلمهم أن الناس كانوا بآياتنا لا يوقنون
And when the Word is fulfilled against them (the unjust), we shall produce from the earth a beast to (face) them: He will speak to them, for that mankind did not believe with assurance in Our Signs.

ويوم نحشر من كل أمة فوجا ممن يكذب بآياتنا فهم يوزعون
One day We shall gather together from every people a troop of those who reject our Signs, and they shall be kept in ranks,-

حتى إذا جاءوا قال أكذبتم بآياتي ولم تحيطوا بها علما أماذا كنتم تعملون
Until, when they come (before the Judgment-seat), (Allah) will say: "Did ye reject My Signs, though ye comprehended them not in knowledge, or what was it ye did?"

ووقع القول عليهم بما ظلموا فهم لا ينطقون
And the Word will be fulfilled against them, because of their wrong-doing, and they will be unable to speak (in plea).

ألم يروا أنا جعلنا الليل ليسكنوا فيه والنهار مبصرا إن في ذلك لآيات لقوم يؤمنون
See they not that We have made the Night for them to rest in and the Day to give them light? Verily in this are Signs for any people that believe!

ويوم ينفخ في الصور ففزع من في السماوات ومن في الأرض إلا من شاء الله وكل أتوه داخرين
And the Day that the Trumpet will be sounded - then will be smitten with terror those who are in the heavens, and those who are on earth, except such as Allah will please (to exempt): and all shall come to His (Presence) as beings conscious of their lowliness.

وترى الجبال تحسبها جامدة وهي تمر مر السحاب صنع الله الذي أتقن كل شيء إنه خبير بما تفعلون
Thou seest the mountains and thinkest them firmly fixed: but they shall pass away as the clouds pass away: (such is) the artistry of Allah, who disposes of all things in perfect order: for he is well acquainted with all that ye do.

من جاء بالحسنة فله خير منها وهم من فزع يومئذ آمنون
If any do good, good will (accrue) to them therefrom; and they will be secure from terror that Day.

ومن جاء بالسيئة فكبت وجوههم في النار هل تجزون إلا ما كنتم تعملون
And if any do evil, their faces will be thrown headlong into the Fire: "Do ye receive a reward other than that which ye have earned by your deeds?"

إنما أمرت أن أعبد رب هذه البلدة الذي حرمها وله كل شيء وأمرت أن أكون من المسلمين
For me, I have been commanded to serve the Lord of this city, Him Who has sanctified it and to Whom (belong) all things: and I am commanded to be of those who bow in Islam to Allah's Will,-

وأن أتلو القرآن فمن اهتدى فإنما يهتدي لنفسه ومن ضل فقل إنما أنا من المنذرين
And to rehearse the Qur'an: and if any accept guidance, they do it for the good of their own souls, and if any stray, say: "I am only a Warner".

وقل الحمد لله سيريكم آياته فتعرفونها وما ربك بغافل عما تعملون
And say: "Praise be to Allah, Who will soon show you His Signs, so that ye shall know them"; and thy Lord is not unmindful of all that ye do.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم طسم
Ta. Sin. Mim.

تلك آيات الكتاب المبين
These are Verses of the Book that makes (things) clear.

نتلو عليك من نبإ موسى وفرعون بالحق لقوم يؤمنون
We rehearse to thee some of the story of Moses and Pharaoh in Truth, for people who believe.

إن فرعون علا في الأرض وجعل أهلها شيعا يستضعف طائفة منهم يذبح أبناءهم ويستحيي نساءهم إنه كان من المفسدين
Truly Pharaoh elated himself in the land and broke up its people into sections, depressing a small group among them: their sons he slew, but he kept alive their females: for he was indeed a maker of mischief.

ونريد أن نمن على الذين استضعفوا في الأرض ونجعلهم أئمة ونجعلهم الوارثين
And We wished to be Gracious to those who were being depressed in the land, to make them leaders (in Faith) and make them heirs,

ونمكن لهم في الأرض ونري فرعون وهامان وجنودهما منهم ما كانوا يحذرون
To establish a firm place for them in the land, and to show Pharaoh, Haman, and their hosts, at their hands, the very things against which they were taking precautions.

وأوحينا إلى أم موسى أن أرضعيه فإذا خفت عليه فألقيه في اليم ولا تخافي ولا تحزني إنا رادوه إليك وجاعلوه من المرسلين
So We sent this inspiration to the mother of Moses: "Suckle (thy child), but when thou hast fears about him, cast him into the river, but fear not nor grieve: for We shall restore him to thee, and We shall make him one of Our messengers."

فالتقطه آل فرعون ليكون لهم عدوا وحزنا إن فرعون وهامان وجنودهما كانوا خاطئين
Then the people of Pharaoh picked him up (from the river): (It was intended) that (Moses) should be to them an adversary and a cause of sorrow: for Pharaoh and Haman and (all) their hosts were men of sin.

وقالت امرأت فرعون قرت عين لي ولك لا تقتلوه عسى أن ينفعنا أو نتخذه ولدا وهم لا يشعرون
The wife of Pharaoh said: "(Here is) joy of the eye, for me and for thee: slay him not. It may be that he will be use to us, or we may adopt him as a son." And they perceived not (what they were doing)!

وأصبح فؤاد أم موسى فارغا إن كادت لتبدي به لولا أن ربطنا على قلبها لتكون من المؤمنين
But there came to be a void in the heart of the mother of Moses: She was going almost to disclose his (case), had We not strengthened her heart (with faith), so that she might remain a (firm) believer.

وقالت لأخته قصيه فبصرت به عن جنب وهم لا يشعرون
And she said to the sister of (Moses), "Follow him" so she (the sister) watched him in the character of a stranger. And they knew not.

وحرمنا عليه المراضع من قبل فقالت هل أدلكم على أهل بيت يكفلونه لكم وهم له ناصحون
And we ordained that he refused suck at first, until (His sister came up and) said: "Shall I point out to you the people of a house that will nourish and bring him up for you and be sincerely attached to him?"...

فرددناه إلى أمه كي تقر عينها ولا تحزن ولتعلم أن وعد الله حق ولكن أكثرهم لا يعلمون
Thus did We restore him to his mother, that her eye might be comforted, that she might not grieve, and that she might know that the promise of Allah is true: but most of them do not understand.

ولما بلغ أشده واستوى آتيناه حكما وعلما وكذلك نجزي المحسنين
When he reached full age, and was firmly established (in life), We bestowed on him wisdom and knowledge: for thus do We reward those who do good.

ودخل المدينة على حين غفلة من أهلها فوجد فيها رجلين يقتتلان هذا من شيعته وهذا من عدوه فاستغاثه الذي من شيعته على الذي من عدوه فوكزه موسى فقضى عليه قال هذا من عمل الشيطان إنه عدو مضل مبين
And he entered the city at a time when its people were not watching: and he found there two men fighting,- one of his own religion, and the other, of his foes. Now the man of his own religion appealed to him against his foe, and Moses struck him with his fist and made an end of him. He said: "This is a work of Evil (Satan): for he is an enemy that manifestly misleads!"

قال رب إني ظلمت نفسي فاغفر لي فغفر له إنه هو الغفور الرحيم
He prayed: "O my Lord! I have indeed wronged my soul! Do Thou then forgive me!" So (Allah) forgave him: for He is the Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

قال رب بما أنعمت علي فلن أكون ظهيرا للمجرمين
He said: "O my Lord! For that Thou hast bestowed Thy Grace on me, never shall I be a help to those who sin!"

فأصبح في المدينة خائفا يترقب فإذا الذي استنصره بالأمس يستصرخه قال له موسى إنك لغوي مبين
So he saw the morning in the city, looking about, in a state of fear, when behold, the man who had, the day before, sought his help called aloud for his help (again). Moses said to him: "Thou art truly, it is clear, a quarrelsome fellow!"

فلما أن أراد أن يبطش بالذي هو عدو لهما قال يا موسى أتريد أن تقتلني كما قتلت نفسا بالأمس إن تريد إلا أن تكون جبارا في الأرض وما تريد أن تكون من المصلحين
Then, when he decided to lay hold of the man who was an enemy to both of them, that man said: "O Moses! Is it thy intention to slay me as thou slewest a man yesterday? Thy intention is none other than to become a powerful violent man in the land, and not to be one who sets things right!"

وجاء رجل من أقصى المدينة يسعى قال يا موسى إن الملأ يأتمرون بك ليقتلوك فاخرج إني لك من الناصحين
And there came a man, running, from the furthest end of the City. He said: "O Moses! the Chiefs are taking counsel together about thee, to slay thee: so get thee away, for I do give thee sincere advice."

فخرج منها خائفا يترقب قال رب نجني من القوم الظالمين
He therefore got away therefrom, looking about, in a state of fear. He prayed "O my Lord! save me from people given to wrong-doing."

ولما توجه تلقاء مدين قال عسى ربي أن يهديني سواء السبيل
Then, when he turned his face towards (the land of) Madyan, he said: "I do hope that my Lord will show me the smooth and straight Path."

ولما ورد ماء مدين وجد عليه أمة من الناس يسقون ووجد من دونهم امرأتين تذودان قال ما خطبكما قالتا لا نسقي حتى يصدر الرعاء وأبونا شيخ كبير
And when he arrived at the watering (place) in Madyan, he found there a group of men watering (their flocks), and besides them he found two women who were keeping back (their flocks). He said: "What is the matter with you?" They said: "We cannot water (our flocks) until the shepherds take back (their flocks): And our father is a very old man."

فسقى لهما ثم تولى إلى الظل فقال رب إني لما أنزلت إلي من خير فقير
So he watered (their flocks) for them; then he turned back to the shade, and said:"O my Lord! truly am I in (desperate) need of any good that Thou dost send me!"

فجاءته إحداهما تمشي على استحياء قالت إن أبي يدعوك ليجزيك أجر ما سقيت لنا فلما جاءه وقص عليه القصص قال لا تخف نجوت من القوم الظالمين
Afterwards one of the (damsels) came (back) to him, walking bashfully. She said: "My father invites thee that he may reward thee for having watered (our flocks) for us." So when he came to him and narrated the story, he said: "Fear thou not: (well) hast thou escaped from unjust people."

قالت إحداهما يا أبت استأجره إن خير من استأجرت القوي الأمين
Said one of the (damsels): "O my (dear) father! engage him on wages: truly the best of men for thee to employ is the (man) who is strong and trusty"....

قال إني أريد أن أنكحك إحدى ابنتي هاتين على أن تأجرني ثماني حجج فإن أتممت عشرا فمن عندك وما أريد أن أشق عليك ستجدني إن شاء الله من الصالحين
He said: "I intend to wed one of these my daughters to thee, on condition that thou serve me for eight years; but if thou complete ten years, it will be (grace) from thee. But I intend not to place thee under a difficulty: thou wilt find me, indeed, if Allah wills, one of the righteous."

قال ذلك بيني وبينك أيما الأجلين قضيت فلا عدوان علي والله على ما نقول وكيل
He said: "Be that (the agreement) between me and thee: whichever of the two terms I fulfil, let there be no ill-will to me. Be Allah a witness to what we say."

فلما قضى موسى الأجل وسار بأهله آنس من جانب الطور نارا قال لأهله امكثوا إني آنست نارا لعلي آتيكم منها بخبر أو جذوة من النار لعلكم تصطلون
Now when Moses had fulfilled the term, and was travelling with his family, he perceived a fire in the direction of Mount Tur. He said to his family: "Tarry ye; I perceive a fire; I hope to bring you from there some information, or a burning firebrand, that ye may warm yourselves."

فلما أتاها نودي من شاطئ الواد الأيمن في البقعة المباركة من الشجرة أن يا موسى إني أنا الله رب العالمين
But when he came to the (fire), a voice was heard from the right bank of the valley, from a tree in hallowed ground: "O Moses! Verily I am Allah, the Lord of the Worlds....

وأن ألق عصاك فلما رآها تهتز كأنها جان ولى مدبرا ولم يعقب يا موسى أقبل ولا تخف إنك من الآمنين
"Now do thou throw thy rod!" but when he saw it moving (of its own accord) as if it had been a snake, he turned back in retreat, and retraced not his steps: O Moses!" (It was said), "Draw near, and fear not: for thou art of those who are secure.

اسلك يدك في جيبك تخرج بيضاء من غير سوء واضمم إليك جناحك من الرهب فذانك برهانان من ربك إلى فرعون وملئه إنهم كانوا قوما فاسقين
"Move thy hand into thy bosom, and it will come forth white without stain (or harm), and draw thy hand close to thy side (to guard) against fear. Those are the two credentials from thy Lord to Pharaoh and his Chiefs: for truly they are a people rebellious and wicked."

قال رب إني قتلت منهم نفسا فأخاف أن يقتلون
He said: "O my Lord! I have slain a man among them, and I fear lest they slay me.

وأخي هارون هو أفصح مني لسانا فأرسله معي ردءا يصدقني إني أخاف أن يكذبون
"And my brother Aaron - He is more eloquent in speech than I: so send him with me as a helper, to confirm (and strengthen) me: for I fear that they may accuse me of falsehood."

قال سنشد عضدك بأخيك ونجعل لكما سلطانا فلا يصلون إليكما بآياتنا أنتما ومن اتبعكما الغالبون
He said: "We will certainly strengthen thy arm through thy brother, and invest you both with authority, so they shall not be able to touch you: with Our Sign shall ye triumph,- you two as well as those who follow you."

فلما جاءهم موسى بآياتنا بينات قالوا ما هذا إلا سحر مفترى وما سمعنا بهذا في آبائنا الأولين
When Moses came to them with Our clear signs, they said: "This is nothing but sorcery faked up: never did we head the like among our fathers of old!"

وقال موسى ربي أعلم بمن جاء بالهدى من عنده ومن تكون له عاقبة الدار إنه لا يفلح الظالمون
Moses said: "My Lord knows best who it is that comes with guidance from Him and whose end will be best in the Hereafter: certain it is that the wrong-doers will not prosper."

وقال فرعون يا أيها الملأ ما علمت لكم من إله غيري فأوقد لي يا هامان على الطين فاجعل لي صرحا لعلي أطلع إلى إله موسى وإني لأظنه من الكاذبين
Pharaoh said: "O Chiefs! no god do I know for you but myself: therefore, O Haman! light me a (kiln to bake bricks) out of clay, and build me a lofty palace, that I may mount up to the god of Moses: but as far as I am concerned, I think (Moses) is a liar!"

واستكبر هو وجنوده في الأرض بغير الحق وظنوا أنهم إلينا لا يرجعون
And he was arrogant and insolent in the land, beyond reason,- He and his hosts: they thought that they would not have to return to Us!

فأخذناه وجنوده فنبذناهم في اليم فانظر كيف كان عاقبة الظالمين
So We seized him and his hosts, and We flung them into the sea: Now behold what was the end of those who did wrong!

وجعلناهم أئمة يدعون إلى النار ويوم القيامة لا ينصرون
And we made them (but) leaders inviting to the Fire; and on the Day of Judgment no help shall they find.

وأتبعناهم في هذه الدنيا لعنة ويوم القيامة هم من المقبوحين
in this world We made a curse to follow them and on the Day of Judgment they will be among the loathed (and despised).

ولقد آتينا موسى الكتاب من بعد ما أهلكنا القرون الأولى بصائر للناس وهدى ورحمة لعلهم يتذكرون
We did reveal to Moses the Book after We had destroyed the earlier generations, (to give) Insight to men, and guidance and Mercy, that they might receive admonition.

وما كنت بجانب الغربي إذ قضينا إلى موسى الأمر وما كنت من الشاهدين
Thou wast not on the Western side when We decreed the Commission to Moses, nor wast thou a witness (of those events).

ولكنا أنشأنا قرونا فتطاول عليهم العمر وما كنت ثاويا في أهل مدين تتلو عليهم آياتنا ولكنا كنا مرسلين
But We raised up (new) generations, and long were the ages that passed over them; but thou wast not a dweller among the people of Madyan, rehearsing Our Signs to them; but it is We Who send messengers (with inspiration).

وما كنت بجانب الطور إذ نادينا ولكن رحمة من ربك لتنذر قوما ما أتاهم من نذير من قبلك لعلهم يتذكرون
Nor wast thou at the side of (the Mountain of) Tur when we called (to Moses). Yet (art thou sent) as Mercy from thy Lord, to give warning to a people to whom no warner had come before thee: in order that they may receive admonition.

ولولا أن تصيبهم مصيبة بما قدمت أيديهم فيقولوا ربنا لولا أرسلت إلينا رسولا فنتبع آياتك ونكون من المؤمنين
If (We had) not (sent thee to the Quraish),- in case a calamity should seize them for (the deeds) that their hands have sent forth, they might say: "Our Lord! why didst Thou not sent us a messenger? We should then have followed Thy Signs and been amongst those who believe!"

فلما جاءهم الحق من عندنا قالوا لولا أوتي مثل ما أوتي موسى أولم يكفروا بما أوتي موسى من قبل قالوا سحران تظاهرا وقالوا إنا بكل كافرون
But (now), when the Truth has come to them from Ourselves, they say, "Why are not (Signs) sent to him, like those which were sent to Moses?" Do they not then reject (the Signs) which were formerly sent to Moses? They say: "Two kinds of sorcery, each assisting the other!" And they say: "For us, we reject all (such things)!"

قل فأتوا بكتاب من عند الله هو أهدى منهما أتبعه إن كنتم صادقين
Say: "Then bring ye a Book from Allah, which is a better guide than either of them, that I may follow it! (do), if ye are truthful!"

فإن لم يستجيبوا لك فاعلم أنما يتبعون أهواءهم ومن أضل ممن اتبع هواه بغير هدى من الله إن الله لا يهدي القوم الظالمين
But if they hearken not to thee, know that they only follow their own lusts: and who is more astray than one who follow his own lusts, devoid of guidance from Allah? for Allah guides not people given to wrong-doing.

ولقد وصلنا لهم القول لعلهم يتذكرون
Now have We caused the Word to reach them themselves, in order that they may receive admonition.

الذين آتيناهم الكتاب من قبله هم به يؤمنون
Those to whom We sent the Book before this,- they do believe in this (revelation):

وإذا يتلى عليهم قالوا آمنا به إنه الحق من ربنا إنا كنا من قبله مسلمين
And when it is recited to them, they say: "We believe therein, for it is the Truth from our Lord: indeed we have been Muslims (bowing to Allah's Will) from before this.

أولئك يؤتون أجرهم مرتين بما صبروا ويدرءون بالحسنة السيئة ومما رزقناهم ينفقون
Twice will they be given their reward, for that they have persevered, that they avert Evil with Good, and that they spend (in charity) out of what We have given them.

وإذا سمعوا اللغو أعرضوا عنه وقالوا لنا أعمالنا ولكم أعمالكم سلام عليكم لا نبتغي الجاهلين
And when they hear vain talk, they turn away therefrom and say: "To us our deeds, and to you yours; peace be to you: we seek not the ignorant."

إنك لا تهدي من أحببت ولكن الله يهدي من يشاء وهو أعلم بالمهتدين
It is true thou wilt not be able to guide every one, whom thou lovest; but Allah guides those whom He will and He knows best those who receive guidance.

وقالوا إن نتبع الهدى معك نتخطف من أرضنا أولم نمكن لهم حرما آمنا يجبى إليه ثمرات كل شيء رزقا من لدنا ولكن أكثرهم لا يعلمون
They say: "If we were to follow the guidance with thee, we should be snatched away from our land." Have We not established for them a secure sanctuary, to which are brought as tribute fruits of all kinds,- a provision from Ourselves? but most of them understand not.

وكم أهلكنا من قرية بطرت معيشتها فتلك مساكنهم لم تسكن من بعدهم إلا قليلا وكنا نحن الوارثين
And how many populations We destroyed, which exulted in their life (of ease and plenty)! now those habitations of theirs, after them, are deserted,- All but a (miserable) few! and We are their heirs!

وما كان ربك مهلك القرى حتى يبعث في أمها رسولا يتلو عليهم آياتنا وما كنا مهلكي القرى إلا وأهلها ظالمون
Nor was thy Lord the one to destroy a population until He had sent to its centre a messenger, rehearsing to them Our Signs; nor are We going to destroy a population except when its members practise iniquity.

وما أوتيتم من شيء فمتاع الحياة الدنيا وزينتها وما عند الله خير وأبقى أفلا تعقلون
The (material) things which ye are given are but the conveniences of this life and the glitter thereof; but that which is with Allah is better and more enduring: will ye not then be wise?

أفمن وعدناه وعدا حسنا فهو لاقيه كمن متعناه متاع الحياة الدنيا ثم هو يوم القيامة من المحضرين
Are (these two) alike?- one to whom We have made a goodly promise, and who is going to reach its (fulfilment), and one to whom We have given the good things of this life, but who, on the Day of Judgment, is to be among those brought up (for punishment)?

ويوم يناديهم فيقول أين شركائي الذين كنتم تزعمون
That Day (Allah) will call to them, and say "Where are my 'partners'?- whom ye imagined (to be such)?"

قال الذين حق عليهم القول ربنا هؤلاء الذين أغوينا أغويناهم كما غوينا تبرأنا إليك ما كانوا إيانا يعبدون
Those against whom the charge will be proved, will say: "Our Lord! These are the ones whom we led astray: we led them astray, as we were astray ourselves: we free ourselves (from them) in Thy presence: it was not us they worshipped."

وقيل ادعوا شركاءكم فدعوهم فلم يستجيبوا لهم ورأوا العذاب لو أنهم كانوا يهتدون
It will be said (to them): "Call upon your 'partners' (for help)": they will call upon them, but they will not listen to them; and they will see the Penalty (before them); (how they will wish) 'if only they had been open to guidance!'

ويوم يناديهم فيقول ماذا أجبتم المرسلين
That Day (Allah) will call to them, and say: "What was the answer ye gave to the messengers?"

فعميت عليهم الأنباء يومئذ فهم لا يتساءلون
Then the (whole) story that Day will seem obscure to them (like light to the blind) and they will not be able (even) to question each other.

فأما من تاب وآمن وعمل صالحا فعسى أن يكون من المفلحين
But any that (in this life) had repented, believed, and worked righteousness, will have hopes to be among those who achieve salvation.

وربك يخلق ما يشاء ويختار ما كان لهم الخيرة سبحان الله وتعالى عما يشركون
Thy Lord does create and choose as He pleases: no choice have they (in the matter): Glory to Allah! and far is He above the partners they ascribe (to Him)!

وربك يعلم ما تكن صدورهم وما يعلنون
And thy Lord knows all that their hearts conceal and all that they reveal.

وهو الله لا إله إلا هو له الحمد في الأولى والآخرة وله الحكم وإليه ترجعون
And He is Allah: There is no god but He. To Him be praise, at the first and at the last: for Him is the Command, and to Him shall ye (all) be brought back.

قل أرأيتم إن جعل الله عليكم الليل سرمدا إلى يوم القيامة من إله غير الله يأتيكم بضياء أفلا تسمعون
Say: See ye? If Allah were to make the night perpetual over you to the Day of Judgment, what god is there other than Allah, who can give you enlightenment? Will ye not then hearken?

قل أرأيتم إن جعل الله عليكم النهار سرمدا إلى يوم القيامة من إله غير الله يأتيكم بليل تسكنون فيه أفلا تبصرون
Say: See ye? If Allah were to make the day perpetual over you to the Day of Judgment, what god is there other than Allah, who can give you a night in which ye can rest? Will ye not then see?

ومن رحمته جعل لكم الليل والنهار لتسكنوا فيه ولتبتغوا من فضله ولعلكم تشكرون
It is out of His Mercy that He has made for you Night and Day,- that ye may rest therein, and that ye may seek of his Grace;- and in order that ye may be grateful.

ويوم يناديهم فيقول أين شركائي الذين كنتم تزعمون
The Day that He will call on them, He will say: "Where are my 'partners'? whom ye imagined (to be such)?"

ونزعنا من كل أمة شهيدا فقلنا هاتوا برهانكم فعلموا أن الحق لله وضل عنهم ما كانوا يفترون
And from each people shall We draw a witness, and We shall say: "Produce your Proof": then shall they know that the Truth is in Allah (alone), and the (lies) which they invented will leave them in lurch.

إن قارون كان من قوم موسى فبغى عليهم وآتيناه من الكنوز ما إن مفاتحه لتنوء بالعصبة أولي القوة إذ قال له قومه لا تفرح إن الله لا يحب الفرحين
Qarun was doubtless, of the people of Moses; but he acted insolently towards them: such were the treasures We had bestowed on him that their very keys would have been a burden to a body of strong men, behold, his people said to him: "Exult not, for Allah loveth not those who exult (in riches).

وابتغ فيما آتاك الله الدار الآخرة ولا تنس نصيبك من الدنيا وأحسن كما أحسن الله إليك ولا تبغ الفساد في الأرض إن الله لا يحب المفسدين
"But seek, with the (wealth) which Allah has bestowed on thee, the Home of the Hereafter, nor forget thy portion in this world: but do thou good, as Allah has been good to thee, and seek not (occasions for) mischief in the land: for Allah loves not those who do mischief."

قال إنما أوتيته على علم عندي أولم يعلم أن الله قد أهلك من قبله من القرون من هو أشد منه قوة وأكثر جمعا ولا يسأل عن ذنوبهم المجرمون
He said: "This has been given to me because of a certain knowledge which I have." Did he not know that Allah had destroyed, before him, (whole) generations,- which were superior to him in strength and greater in the amount (of riches) they had collected? but the wicked are not called (immediately) to account for their sins.

فخرج على قومه في زينته قال الذين يريدون الحياة الدنيا يا ليت لنا مثل ما أوتي قارون إنه لذو حظ عظيم
So he went forth among his people in the (pride of his wordly) glitter. Said those whose aim is the Life of this World: "Oh! that we had the like of what Qarun has got! for he is truly a lord of mighty good fortune!"

وقال الذين أوتوا العلم ويلكم ثواب الله خير لمن آمن وعمل صالحا ولا يلقاها إلا الصابرون
But those who had been granted (true) knowledge said: "Alas for you! The reward of Allah (in the Hereafter) is best for those who believe and work righteousness: but this none shall attain, save those who steadfastly persevere (in good)."

فخسفنا به وبداره الأرض فما كان له من فئة ينصرونه من دون الله وما كان من المنتصرين
Then We caused the earth to swallow up him and his house; and he had not (the least little) party to help him against Allah, nor could he defend himself.

وأصبح الذين تمنوا مكانه بالأمس يقولون ويكأن الله يبسط الرزق لمن يشاء من عباده ويقدر لولا أن من الله علينا لخسف بنا ويكأنه لا يفلح الكافرون
And those who had envied his position the day before began to say on the morrow: "Ah! it is indeed Allah Who enlarges the provision or restricts it, to any of His servants He pleases! had it not been that Allah was gracious to us, He could have caused the earth to swallow us up! Ah! those who reject Allah will assuredly never prosper."

تلك الدار الآخرة نجعلها للذين لا يريدون علوا في الأرض ولا فسادا والعاقبة للمتقين
That Home of the Hereafter We shall give to those who intend not high-handedness or mischief on earth: and the end is (best) for the righteous.

من جاء بالحسنة فله خير منها ومن جاء بالسيئة فلا يجزى الذين عملوا السيئات إلا ما كانوا يعملون
If any does good, the reward to him is better than his deed; but if any does evil, the doers of evil are only punished (to the extent) of their deeds.

إن الذي فرض عليك القرآن لرادك إلى معاد قل ربي أعلم من جاء بالهدى ومن هو في ضلال مبين
Verily He Who ordained the Qur'an for thee, will bring thee back to the Place of Return. Say: "My Lord knows best who it is that brings true guidance, and who is in manifest error."

وما كنت ترجو أن يلقى إليك الكتاب إلا رحمة من ربك فلا تكونن ظهيرا للكافرين
And thou hadst not expected that the Book would be sent to thee except as a Mercy from thy Lord: Therefore lend not thou support in any way to those who reject (Allah's Message).

ولا يصدنك عن آيات الله بعد إذ أنزلت إليك وادع إلى ربك ولا تكونن من المشركين
And let nothing keep thee back from the Signs of Allah after they have been revealed to thee: and invite (men) to thy Lord, and be not of the company of those who join gods with Allah.

ولا تدع مع الله إلها آخر لا إله إلا هو كل شيء هالك إلا وجهه له الحكم وإليه ترجعون
And call not, besides Allah, on another god. There is no god but He. Everything (that exists) will perish except His own Face. To Him belongs the Command, and to Him will ye (all) be brought back.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الم
A. L. M.

أحسب الناس أن يتركوا أن يقولوا آمنا وهم لا يفتنون
Do men think that they will be left alone on saying, "We believe", and that they will not be tested?

ولقد فتنا الذين من قبلهم فليعلمن الله الذين صدقوا وليعلمن الكاذبين
We did test those before them, and Allah will certainly know those who are true from those who are false.

أم حسب الذين يعملون السيئات أن يسبقونا ساء ما يحكمون
Do those who practise evil think that they will get the better of Us? Evil is their judgment!

من كان يرجو لقاء الله فإن أجل الله لآت وهو السميع العليم
For those whose hopes are in the meeting with Allah (in the Hereafter, let them strive); for the term (appointed) by Allah is surely coming and He hears and knows (all things).

ومن جاهد فإنما يجاهد لنفسه إن الله لغني عن العالمين
And if any strive (with might and main), they do so for their own souls: for Allah is free of all needs from all creation.

والذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات لنكفرن عنهم سيئاتهم ولنجزينهم أحسن الذي كانوا يعملون
Those who believe and work righteous deeds,- from them shall We blot out all evil (that may be) in them, and We shall reward them according to the best of their deeds.

ووصينا الإنسان بوالديه حسنا وإن جاهداك لتشرك بي ما ليس لك به علم فلا تطعهما إلي مرجعكم فأنبئكم بما كنتم تعملون
We have enjoined on man kindness to parents: but if they (either of them) strive (to force) thee to join with Me (in worship) anything of which thou hast no knowledge, obey them not. Ye have (all) to return to me, and I will tell you (the truth) of all that ye did.

والذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات لندخلنهم في الصالحين
And those who believe and work righteous deeds,- them shall We admit to the company of the Righteous.

ومن الناس من يقول آمنا بالله فإذا أوذي في الله جعل فتنة الناس كعذاب الله ولئن جاء نصر من ربك ليقولن إنا كنا معكم أوليس الله بأعلم بما في صدور العالمين
Then there are among men such as say, "We believe in Allah"; but when they suffer affliction in (the cause of) Allah, they treat men's oppression as if it were the Wrath of Allah! And if help comes (to thee) from thy Lord, they are sure to say, "We have (always) been with you!" Does not Allah know best all that is in the hearts of all creation?

وليعلمن الله الذين آمنوا وليعلمن المنافقين
And Allah most certainly knows those who believe, and as certainly those who are Hypocrites.

وقال الذين كفروا للذين آمنوا اتبعوا سبيلنا ولنحمل خطاياكم وما هم بحاملين من خطاياهم من شيء إنهم لكاذبون
And the Unbelievers say to those who believe: "Follow our path, and we will bear (the consequences) of your faults." Never in the least will they bear their faults: in fact they are liars!

وليحملن أثقالهم وأثقالا مع أثقالهم وليسألن يوم القيامة عما كانوا يفترون
They will bear their own burdens, and (other) burdens along with their own, and on the Day of Judgments they will be called to account for their falsehoods.

ولقد أرسلنا نوحا إلى قومه فلبث فيهم ألف سنة إلا خمسين عاما فأخذهم الطوفان وهم ظالمون
We (once) sent Noah to his people, and he tarried among them a thousand years less fifty: but the Deluge overwhelmed them while they (persisted in) sin.

فأنجيناه وأصحاب السفينة وجعلناها آية للعالمين
But We saved him and the companions of the Ark, and We made the (Ark) a Sign for all peoples!

وإبراهيم إذ قال لقومه اعبدوا الله واتقوه ذلكم خير لكم إن كنتم تعلمون
And (We also saved) Abraham: behold, he said to his people, "Serve Allah and fear Him: that will be best for you- If ye understand!

إنما تعبدون من دون الله أوثانا وتخلقون إفكا إن الذين تعبدون من دون الله لا يملكون لكم رزقا فابتغوا عند الله الرزق واعبدوه واشكروا له إليه ترجعون
"For ye do worship idols besides Allah, and ye invent falsehood. The things that ye worship besides Allah have no power to give you sustenance: then seek ye sustenance from Allah, serve Him, and be grateful to Him: to Him will be your return.

وإن تكذبوا فقد كذب أمم من قبلكم وما على الرسول إلا البلاغ المبين
"And if ye reject (the Message), so did generations before you: and the duty of the messenger is only to preach publicly (and clearly)."

أولم يروا كيف يبدئ الله الخلق ثم يعيده إن ذلك على الله يسير
See they not how Allah originates creation, then repeats it: truly that is easy for Allah.

قل سيروا في الأرض فانظروا كيف بدأ الخلق ثم الله ينشئ النشأة الآخرة إن الله على كل شيء قدير
Say: "Travel through the earth and see how Allah did originate creation; so will Allah produce a later creation: for Allah has power over all things.

يعذب من يشاء ويرحم من يشاء وإليه تقلبون
"He punishes whom He pleases, and He grants Mercy to whom He pleases, and towards Him are ye turned.

وما أنتم بمعجزين في الأرض ولا في السماء وما لكم من دون الله من ولي ولا نصير
"Not on earth nor in heaven will ye be able (fleeing) to frustrate (his Plan), nor have ye, besides Allah, any protector or helper."

والذين كفروا بآيات الله ولقائه أولئك يئسوا من رحمتي وأولئك لهم عذاب أليم
Those who reject the Signs of Allah and the Meeting with Him (in the Hereafter),- it is they who shall despair of My Mercy: it is they who will (suffer) a most grievous Penalty.

فما كان جواب قومه إلا أن قالوا اقتلوه أو حرقوه فأنجاه الله من النار إن في ذلك لآيات لقوم يؤمنون
So naught was the answer of (Abraham's) people except that they said: "Slay him or burn him." But Allah did save him from the Fire. Verily in this are Signs for people who believe.

وقال إنما اتخذتم من دون الله أوثانا مودة بينكم في الحياة الدنيا ثم يوم القيامة يكفر بعضكم ببعض ويلعن بعضكم بعضا ومأواكم النار وما لكم من ناصرين
And he said: "For you, ye have taken (for worship) idols besides Allah, out of mutual love and regard between yourselves in this life; but on the Day of Judgment ye shall disown each other and curse each other: and your abode will be the Fire, and ye shall have none to help."

فآمن له لوط وقال إني مهاجر إلى ربي إنه هو العزيز الحكيم
But Lut had faith in Him: He said: "I will leave home for the sake of my Lord: for He is Exalted in Might, and Wise."

ووهبنا له إسحاق ويعقوب وجعلنا في ذريته النبوة والكتاب وآتيناه أجره في الدنيا وإنه في الآخرة لمن الصالحين
And We gave (Abraham) Isaac and Jacob, and ordained among his progeny Prophethood and Revelation, and We granted him his reward in this life; and he was in the Hereafter (of the company) of the Righteous.

ولوطا إذ قال لقومه إنكم لتأتون الفاحشة ما سبقكم بها من أحد من العالمين
And (remember) Lut: behold, he said to his people: "Ye do commit lewdness, such as no people in Creation (ever) committed before you.

أئنكم لتأتون الرجال وتقطعون السبيل وتأتون في ناديكم المنكر فما كان جواب قومه إلا أن قالوا ائتنا بعذاب الله إن كنت من الصادقين
"Do ye indeed approach men, and cut off the highway?- and practise wickedness (even) in your councils?" But his people gave no answer but this: they said: "Bring us the Wrath of Allah if thou tellest the truth."

قال رب انصرني على القوم المفسدين
He said: "O my Lord! help Thou me against people who do mischief!"

ولما جاءت رسلنا إبراهيم بالبشرى قالوا إنا مهلكو أهل هذه القرية إن أهلها كانوا ظالمين
When Our Messengers came to Abraham with the good news, they said: "We are indeed going to destroy the people of this township: for truly they are (addicted to) crime."

قال إن فيها لوطا قالوا نحن أعلم بمن فيها لننجينه وأهله إلا امرأته كانت من الغابرين
He said: "But there is Lut there." They said: "Well do we know who is there: we will certainly save him and his following,- except his wife: she is of those who lag behind!"

ولما أن جاءت رسلنا لوطا سيء بهم وضاق بهم ذرعا وقالوا لا تخف ولا تحزن إنا منجوك وأهلك إلا امرأتك كانت من الغابرين
And when Our Messengers came to Lut, he was grieved on their account, and felt himself powerless (to protect) them: but they said: "Fear thou not, nor grieve: we are (here) to save thee and thy following, except thy wife: she is of those who lag behind.

إنا منزلون على أهل هذه القرية رجزا من السماء بما كانوا يفسقون
"For we are going to bring down on the people of this township a Punishment from heaven, because they have been wickedly rebellious."

ولقد تركنا منها آية بينة لقوم يعقلون
And We have left thereof an evident Sign, for any people who (care to) understand.

وإلى مدين أخاهم شعيبا فقال يا قوم اعبدوا الله وارجوا اليوم الآخر ولا تعثوا في الأرض مفسدين
To the Madyan (people) (We sent) their brother Shu'aib. Then he said: "O my people! serve Allah, and fear the Last Day: nor commit evil on the earth, with intent to do mischief."

فكذبوه فأخذتهم الرجفة فأصبحوا في دارهم جاثمين
But they rejected him: Then the mighty Blast seized them, and they lay prostrate in their homes by the morning.

وعادا وثمود وقد تبين لكم من مساكنهم وزين لهم الشيطان أعمالهم فصدهم عن السبيل وكانوا مستبصرين
(Remember also) the 'Ad and the Thamud (people): clearly will appear to you from (the traces) of their buildings (their fate): the Evil One made their deeds alluring to them, and kept them back from the Path, though they were gifted with intelligence and skill.

وقارون وفرعون وهامان ولقد جاءهم موسى بالبينات فاستكبروا في الأرض وما كانوا سابقين
(Remember also) Qarun, Pharaoh, and Haman: there came to them Moses with Clear Signs, but they behaved with insolence on the earth; yet they could not overreach (Us).

فكلا أخذنا بذنبه فمنهم من أرسلنا عليه حاصبا ومنهم من أخذته الصيحة ومنهم من خسفنا به الأرض ومنهم من أغرقنا وما كان الله ليظلمهم ولكن كانوا أنفسهم يظلمون
Each one of them We seized for his crime: of them, against some We sent a violent tornado (with showers of stones); some were caught by a (mighty) Blast; some We caused the earth to swallow up; and some We drowned (in the waters): It was not Allah Who injured (or oppressed) them:" They injured (and oppressed) their own souls.

مثل الذين اتخذوا من دون الله أولياء كمثل العنكبوت اتخذت بيتا وإن أوهن البيوت لبيت العنكبوت لو كانوا يعلمون
The parable of those who take protectors other than Allah is that of the spider, who builds (to itself) a house; but truly the flimsiest of houses is the spider's house;- if they but knew.

إن الله يعلم ما يدعون من دونه من شيء وهو العزيز الحكيم
Verily Allah doth know of (every thing) whatever that they call upon besides Him: and He is Exalted (in power), Wise.

وتلك الأمثال نضربها للناس وما يعقلها إلا العالمون
And such are the Parables We set forth for mankind, but only those understand them who have knowledge.

خلق الله السماوات والأرض بالحق إن في ذلك لآية للمؤمنين
Allah created the heavens and the earth in true (proportions): verily in that is a Sign for those who believe.

اتل ما أوحي إليك من الكتاب وأقم الصلاة إن الصلاة تنهى عن الفحشاء والمنكر ولذكر الله أكبر والله يعلم ما تصنعون
Recite what is sent of the Book by inspiration to thee, and establish regular Prayer: for Prayer restrains from shameful and unjust deeds; and remembrance of Allah is the greatest (thing in life) without doubt. And Allah knows the (deeds) that ye do.

ولا تجادلوا أهل الكتاب إلا بالتي هي أحسن إلا الذين ظلموا منهم وقولوا آمنا بالذي أنزل إلينا وأنزل إليكم وإلهنا وإلهكم واحد ونحن له مسلمون
And dispute ye not with the People of the Book, except with means better (than mere disputation), unless it be with those of them who inflict wrong (and injury): but say, "We believe in the revelation which has come down to us and in that which came down to you; Our Allah and your Allah is one; and it is to Him we bow (in Islam)."

وكذلك أنزلنا إليك الكتاب فالذين آتيناهم الكتاب يؤمنون به ومن هؤلاء من يؤمن به وما يجحد بآياتنا إلا الكافرون
And thus (it is) that We have sent down the Book to thee. So the People of the Book believe therein, as also do some of these (pagan Arabs): and none but Unbelievers reject our signs.

وما كنت تتلو من قبله من كتاب ولا تخطه بيمينك إذا لارتاب المبطلون
And thou wast not (able) to recite a Book before this (Book came), nor art thou (able) to transcribe it with thy right hand: In that case, indeed, would the talkers of vanities have doubted.

بل هو آيات بينات في صدور الذين أوتوا العلم وما يجحد بآياتنا إلا الظالمون
Nay, here are Signs self-evident in the hearts of those endowed with knowledge: and none but the unjust reject Our Signs.

وقالوا لولا أنزل عليه آيات من ربه قل إنما الآيات عند الله وإنما أنا نذير مبين
Ye they say: "Why are not Signs sent down to him from his Lord?" Say: "The signs are indeed with Allah: and I am indeed a clear Warner."

أولم يكفهم أنا أنزلنا عليك الكتاب يتلى عليهم إن في ذلك لرحمة وذكرى لقوم يؤمنون
And is it not enough for them that we have sent down to thee the Book which is rehearsed to them? Verily, in it is Mercy and a Reminder to those who believe.

قل كفى بالله بيني وبينكم شهيدا يعلم ما في السماوات والأرض والذين آمنوا بالباطل وكفروا بالله أولئك هم الخاسرون
Say: "Enough is Allah for a witness between me and you: He knows what is in the heavens and on earth. And it is those who believe in vanities and reject Allah, that will perish (in the end).

ويستعجلونك بالعذاب ولولا أجل مسمى لجاءهم العذاب وليأتينهم بغتة وهم لا يشعرون
They ask thee to hasten on the Punishment (for them): had it not been for a term (of respite) appointed, the Punishment would certainly have come to them: and it will certainly reach them,- of a sudden, while they perceive not!

يستعجلونك بالعذاب وإن جهنم لمحيطة بالكافرين
They ask thee to hasten on the Punishment: but, of a surety, Hell will encompass the Rejecters of Faith!-

يوم يغشاهم العذاب من فوقهم ومن تحت أرجلهم ويقول ذوقوا ما كنتم تعملون
On the Day that the Punishment shall cover them from above them and from below them, and (a Voice) shall say: "Taste ye (the fruits) of your deeds!"

يا عبادي الذين آمنوا إن أرضي واسعة فإياي فاعبدون
O My servants who believe! truly, spacious is My Earth: therefore serve ye Me - (and Me alone)!

كل نفس ذائقة الموت ثم إلينا ترجعون
Every soul shall have a taste of death in the end to Us shall ye be brought back.

والذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات لنبوئنهم من الجنة غرفا تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها نعم أجر العاملين
But those who believe and work deeds of righteousness - to them shall We give a Home in Heaven,- lofty mansions beneath which flow rivers,- to dwell therein for aye;- an excellent reward for those who do (good)!-

الذين صبروا وعلى ربهم يتوكلون
Those who persevere in patience, and put their trust, in their Lord and Cherisher.

وكأين من دابة لا تحمل رزقها الله يرزقها وإياكم وهو السميع العليم
How many are the creatures that carry not their own sustenance? It is Allah who feeds (both) them and you: for He hears and knows (all things).

ولئن سألتهم من خلق السماوات والأرض وسخر الشمس والقمر ليقولن الله فأنى يؤفكون
If indeed thou ask them who has created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon (to his Law), they will certainly reply, "Allah". How are they then deluded away (from the truth)?

الله يبسط الرزق لمن يشاء من عباده ويقدر له إن الله بكل شيء عليم
Allah enlarges the sustenance (which He gives) to whichever of His servants He pleases; and He (similarly) grants by (strict) measure, (as He pleases): for Allah has full knowledge of all things.

ولئن سألتهم من نزل من السماء ماء فأحيا به الأرض من بعد موتها ليقولن الله قل الحمد لله بل أكثرهم لا يعقلون
And if indeed thou ask them who it is that sends down rain from the sky, and gives life therewith to the earth after its death, they will certainly reply, "Allah!" Say, "Praise be to Allah!" But most of them understand not.

وما هذه الحياة الدنيا إلا لهو ولعب وإن الدار الآخرة لهي الحيوان لو كانوا يعلمون
What is the life of this world but amusement and play? but verily the Home in the Hereafter,- that is life indeed, if they but knew.

فإذا ركبوا في الفلك دعوا الله مخلصين له الدين فلما نجاهم إلى البر إذا هم يشركون
Now, if they embark on a boat, they call on Allah, making their devotion sincerely (and exclusively) to Him; but when He has delivered them safely to (dry) land, behold, they give a share (of their worship to others)!-

ليكفروا بما آتيناهم وليتمتعوا فسوف يعلمون
Disdaining ungratefully Our gifts, and giving themselves up to (worldly) enjoyment! But soon will they know.

أولم يروا أنا جعلنا حرما آمنا ويتخطف الناس من حولهم أفبالباطل يؤمنون وبنعمة الله يكفرون
Do they not then see that We have made a sanctuary secure, and that men are being snatched away from all around them? Then, do they believe in that which is vain, and reject the Grace of Allah?

ومن أظلم ممن افترى على الله كذبا أو كذب بالحق لما جاءه أليس في جهنم مثوى للكافرين
And who does more wrong than he who invents a lie against Allah or rejects the Truth when it reaches him? Is there not a home in Hell for those who reject Faith?

والذين جاهدوا فينا لنهدينهم سبلنا وإن الله لمع المحسنين
And those who strive in Our (cause),- We will certainly guide them to our Paths: For verily Allah is with those who do right.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الم
A. L. M.

غلبت الروم
The Roman Empire has been defeated-

في أدنى الأرض وهم من بعد غلبهم سيغلبون
In a land close by; but they, (even) after (this) defeat of theirs, will soon be victorious-

في بضع سنين لله الأمر من قبل ومن بعد ويومئذ يفرح المؤمنون
Within a few years. With Allah is the Decision, in the past and in the Future: on that Day shall the Believers rejoice-

بنصر الله ينصر من يشاء وهو العزيز الرحيم
With the help of Allah. He helps whom He will, and He is exalted in might, most merciful.

وعد الله لا يخلف الله وعده ولكن أكثر الناس لا يعلمون
(It is) the promise of Allah. Never does Allah depart from His promise: but most men understand not.

يعلمون ظاهرا من الحياة الدنيا وهم عن الآخرة هم غافلون
They know but the outer (things) in the life of this world: but of the End of things they are heedless.

أولم يتفكروا في أنفسهم ما خلق الله السماوات والأرض وما بينهما إلا بالحق وأجل مسمى وإن كثيرا من الناس بلقاء ربهم لكافرون
Do they not reflect in their own minds? Not but for just ends and for a term appointed, did Allah create the heavens and the earth, and all between them: yet are there truly many among men who deny the meeting with their Lord (at the Resurrection)!

أولم يسيروا في الأرض فينظروا كيف كان عاقبة الذين من قبلهم كانوا أشد منهم قوة وأثاروا الأرض وعمروها أكثر مما عمروها وجاءتهم رسلهم بالبينات فما كان الله ليظلمهم ولكن كانوا أنفسهم يظلمون
Do they not travel through the earth, and see what was the end of those before them? They were superior to them in strength: they tilled the soil and populated it in greater numbers than these have done: there came to them their messengers with Clear (Signs). (Which they rejected, to their own destruction): It was not Allah Who wronged them, but they wronged their own souls.

ثم كان عاقبة الذين أساءوا السوأى أن كذبوا بآيات الله وكانوا بها يستهزئون
In the long run evil in the extreme will be the End of those who do evil; for that they rejected the Signs of Allah, and held them up to ridicule.

الله يبدأ الخلق ثم يعيده ثم إليه ترجعون
It is Allah Who begins (the process of) creation; then repeats it; then shall ye be brought back to Him.

ويوم تقوم الساعة يبلس المجرمون
On the Day that the Hour will be established, the guilty will be struck dumb with despair.

ولم يكن لهم من شركائهم شفعاء وكانوا بشركائهم كافرين
No intercessor will they have among their "Partners" and they will (themselves) reject their "Partners".

ويوم تقوم الساعة يومئذ يتفرقون
On the Day that the Hour will be established,- that Day shall (all men) be sorted out.

فأما الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات فهم في روضة يحبرون
Then those who have believed and worked righteous deeds, shall be made happy in a Mead of Delight.

وأما الذين كفروا وكذبوا بآياتنا ولقاء الآخرة فأولئك في العذاب محضرون
And those who have rejected Faith and falsely denied our Signs and the meeting of the Hereafter,- such shall be brought forth to Punishment.

فسبحان الله حين تمسون وحين تصبحون
So (give) glory to Allah, when ye reach eventide and when ye rise in the morning;

وله الحمد في السماوات والأرض وعشيا وحين تظهرون
Yea, to Him be praise, in the heavens and on earth; and in the late afternoon and when the day begins to decline.

يخرج الحي من الميت ويخرج الميت من الحي ويحيي الأرض بعد موتها وكذلك تخرجون
It is He Who brings out the living from the dead, and brings out the dead from the living, and Who gives life to the earth after it is dead: and thus shall ye be brought out (from the dead).

ومن آياته أن خلقكم من تراب ثم إذا أنتم بشر تنتشرون
Among His Signs in this, that He created you from dust; and then,- behold, ye are men scattered (far and wide)!

ومن آياته أن خلق لكم من أنفسكم أزواجا لتسكنوا إليها وجعل بينكم مودة ورحمة إن في ذلك لآيات لقوم يتفكرون
And among His Signs is this, that He created for you mates from among yourselves, that ye may dwell in tranquillity with them, and He has put love and mercy between your (hearts): verily in that are Signs for those who reflect.

ومن آياته خلق السماوات والأرض واختلاف ألسنتكم وألوانكم إن في ذلك لآيات للعالمين
And among His Signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the variations in your languages and your colours: verily in that are Signs for those who know.

ومن آياته منامكم بالليل والنهار وابتغاؤكم من فضله إن في ذلك لآيات لقوم يسمعون
And among His Signs is the sleep that ye take by night and by day, and the quest that ye (make for livelihood) out of His Bounty: verily in that are signs for those who hearken.

ومن آياته يريكم البرق خوفا وطمعا وينزل من السماء ماء فيحيي به الأرض بعد موتها إن في ذلك لآيات لقوم يعقلون
And among His Signs, He shows you the lightning, by way both of fear and of hope, and He sends down rain from the sky and with it gives life to the earth after it is dead: verily in that are Signs for those who are wise.

ومن آياته أن تقوم السماء والأرض بأمره ثم إذا دعاكم دعوة من الأرض إذا أنتم تخرجون
And among His Signs is this, that heaven and earth stand by His Command: then when He calls you, by a single call, from the earth, behold, ye (straightway) come forth.

وله من في السماوات والأرض كل له قانتون
To Him belongs every being that is in the heavens and on earth: all are devoutly obedient to Him.

وهو الذي يبدأ الخلق ثم يعيده وهو أهون عليه وله المثل الأعلى في السماوات والأرض وهو العزيز الحكيم
It is He Who begins (the process of) creation; then repeats it; and for Him it is most easy. To Him belongs the loftiest similitude (we can think of) in the heavens and the earth: for He is Exalted in Might, full of wisdom.

ضرب لكم مثلا من أنفسكم هل لكم من ما ملكت أيمانكم من شركاء في ما رزقناكم فأنتم فيه سواء تخافونهم كخيفتكم أنفسكم كذلك نفصل الآيات لقوم يعقلون
He does propound to you a similitude from your own (experience): do ye have partners among those whom your right hands possess, to share as equals in the wealth We have bestowed on you? Do ye fear them as ye fear each other? Thus do we explain the Signs in detail to a people that understand.

بل اتبع الذين ظلموا أهواءهم بغير علم فمن يهدي من أضل الله وما لهم من ناصرين
Nay, the wrong-doers (merely) follow their own lusts, being devoid of knowledge. But who will guide those whom Allah leaves astray? To them there will be no helpers.

فأقم وجهك للدين حنيفا فطرت الله التي فطر الناس عليها لا تبديل لخلق الله ذلك الدين القيم ولكن أكثر الناس لا يعلمون
So set thou thy face steadily and truly to the Faith: (establish) Allah's handiwork according to the pattern on which He has made mankind: no change (let there be) in the work (wrought) by Allah: that is the standard Religion: but most among mankind understand not.

منيبين إليه واتقوه وأقيموا الصلاة ولا تكونوا من المشركين
Turn ye back in repentance to Him, and fear Him: establish regular prayers, and be not ye among those who join gods with Allah,-

من الذين فرقوا دينهم وكانوا شيعا كل حزب بما لديهم فرحون
Those who split up their Religion, and become (mere) Sects,- each party rejoicing in that which is with itself!

وإذا مس الناس ضر دعوا ربهم منيبين إليه ثم إذا أذاقهم منه رحمة إذا فريق منهم بربهم يشركون
When trouble touches men, they cry to their Lord, turning back to Him in repentance: but when He gives them a taste of Mercy as from Himself, behold, some of them pay part-worship to other god's besides their Lord,-

ليكفروا بما آتيناهم فتمتعوا فسوف تعلمون
(As if) to show their ingratitude for the (favours) We have bestowed on them! Then enjoy (your brief day); but soon will ye know (your folly).

أم أنزلنا عليهم سلطانا فهو يتكلم بما كانوا به يشركون
Or have We sent down authority to them, which points out to them the things to which they pay part-worship?

وإذا أذقنا الناس رحمة فرحوا بها وإن تصبهم سيئة بما قدمت أيديهم إذا هم يقنطون
When We give men a taste of Mercy, they exult thereat: and when some evil afflicts them because of what their (own) hands have sent forth, behold, they are in despair!

أولم يروا أن الله يبسط الرزق لمن يشاء ويقدر إن في ذلك لآيات لقوم يؤمنون
See they not that Allah enlarges the provision and restricts it, to whomsoever He pleases? Verily in that are Signs for those who believe.

فآت ذا القربى حقه والمسكين وابن السبيل ذلك خير للذين يريدون وجه الله وأولئك هم المفلحون
So give what is due to kindred, the needy, and the wayfarer. That is best for those who seek the Countenance, of Allah, and it is they who will prosper.

وما آتيتم من ربا ليربو في أموال الناس فلا يربو عند الله وما آتيتم من زكاة تريدون وجه الله فأولئك هم المضعفون
That which ye lay out for increase through the property of (other) people, will have no increase with Allah: but that which ye lay out for charity, seeking the Countenance of Allah, (will increase): it is these who will get a recompense multiplied.

الله الذي خلقكم ثم رزقكم ثم يميتكم ثم يحييكم هل من شركائكم من يفعل من ذلكم من شيء سبحانه وتعالى عما يشركون
It is Allah Who has created you: further, He has provided for your sustenance; then He will cause you to die; and again He will give you life. Are there any of your (false) "Partners" who can do any single one of these things? Glory to Him! and high is He above the partners they attribute (to him)!

ظهر الفساد في البر والبحر بما كسبت أيدي الناس ليذيقهم بعض الذي عملوا لعلهم يرجعون
Mischief has appeared on land and sea because of (the meed) that the hands of men have earned, that (Allah) may give them a taste of some of their deeds: in order that they may turn back (from Evil).

قل سيروا في الأرض فانظروا كيف كان عاقبة الذين من قبل كان أكثرهم مشركين
Say: "Travel through the earth and see what was the end of those before (you): Most of them worshipped others besides Allah."

فأقم وجهك للدين القيم من قبل أن يأتي يوم لا مرد له من الله يومئذ يصدعون
But set thou thy face to the right Religion before there come from Allah the Day which there is no chance of averting: on that Day shall men be divided (in two).

من كفر فعليه كفره ومن عمل صالحا فلأنفسهم يمهدون
Those who reject Faith will suffer from that rejection: and those who work righteousness will spread their couch (of repose) for themselves (in heaven):

ليجزي الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات من فضله إنه لا يحب الكافرين
That He may reward those who believe and work righteous deeds, out of his Bounty. For He loves not those who reject Faith.

ومن آياته أن يرسل الرياح مبشرات وليذيقكم من رحمته ولتجري الفلك بأمره ولتبتغوا من فضله ولعلكم تشكرون
Among His Signs is this, that He sends the Winds, as heralds of Glad Tidings, giving you a taste of His (Grace and) Mercy,- that the ships may sail (majestically) by His Command and that ye may seek of His Bounty: in order that ye may be grateful.

ولقد أرسلنا من قبلك رسلا إلى قومهم فجاءوهم بالبينات فانتقمنا من الذين أجرموا وكان حقا علينا نصر المؤمنين
We did indeed send, before thee, messengers to their (respective) peoples, and they came to them with Clear Signs: then, to those who transgressed, We meted out Retribution: and it was due from Us to aid those who believed.

الله الذي يرسل الرياح فتثير سحابا فيبسطه في السماء كيف يشاء ويجعله كسفا فترى الودق يخرج من خلاله فإذا أصاب به من يشاء من عباده إذا هم يستبشرون
It is Allah Who sends the Winds, and they raise the Clouds: then does He spread them in the sky as He wills, and break them into fragments, until thou seest rain-drops issue from the midst thereof: then when He has made them reach such of his servants as He wills behold, they do rejoice!-

وإن كانوا من قبل أن ينزل عليهم من قبله لمبلسين
Even though, before they received (the rain) - just before this - they were dumb with despair!

فانظر إلى آثار رحمت الله كيف يحيي الأرض بعد موتها إن ذلك لمحيي الموتى وهو على كل شيء قدير
Then contemplate (O man!) the memorials of Allah's Mercy!- how He gives life to the earth after its death: verily the same will give life to the men who are dead: for He has power over all things.

ولئن أرسلنا ريحا فرأوه مصفرا لظلوا من بعده يكفرون
And if We (but) send a Wind from which they see (their tilth) turn yellow,- behold, they become, thereafter, Ungrateful (Unbelievers)!

فإنك لا تسمع الموتى ولا تسمع الصم الدعاء إذا ولوا مدبرين
So verily thou canst not make the dead to hear, nor canst thou make the deaf to hear the call, when they show their backs and turn away.

وما أنت بهاد العمي عن ضلالتهم إن تسمع إلا من يؤمن بآياتنا فهم مسلمون
Nor canst thou lead back the blind from their straying: only those wilt thou make to hear, who believe in Our signs and submit (their wills in Islam).

الله الذي خلقكم من ضعف ثم جعل من بعد ضعف قوة ثم جعل من بعد قوة ضعفا وشيبة يخلق ما يشاء وهو العليم القدير
It is Allah Who created you in a state of (helpless) weakness, then gave (you) strength after weakness, then, after strength, gave (you weakness and a hoary head: He creates as He wills, and it is He Who has all knowledge and power.

ويوم تقوم الساعة يقسم المجرمون ما لبثوا غير ساعة كذلك كانوا يؤفكون
On the Day that the Hour (of Reckoning) will be established, the transgressors will swear that they tarried not but an hour: thus were they used to being deluded!

وقال الذين أوتوا العلم والإيمان لقد لبثتم في كتاب الله إلى يوم البعث فهذا يوم البعث ولكنكم كنتم لا تعلمون
But those endued with knowledge and faith will say: "Indeed ye did tarry, within Allah's Decree, to the Day of Resurrection, and this is the Day of Resurrection: but ye - ye were not aware!"

فيومئذ لا ينفع الذين ظلموا معذرتهم ولا هم يستعتبون
So on that Day no excuse of theirs will avail the transgressors, nor will they be invited (then) to seek grace (by repentance).

ولقد ضربنا للناس في هذا القرآن من كل مثل ولئن جئتهم بآية ليقولن الذين كفروا إن أنتم إلا مبطلون
verily We have propounded for men, in this Qur'an every kind of Parable: But if thou bring to them any Sign, the Unbelievers are sure to say, "Ye do nothing but talk vanities."

كذلك يطبع الله على قلوب الذين لا يعلمون
Thus does Allah seal up the hearts of those who understand not.

فاصبر إن وعد الله حق ولا يستخفنك الذين لا يوقنون
So patiently persevere: for verily the promise of Allah is true: nor let those shake thy firmness, who have (themselves) no certainty of faith.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الم
A. L. M.

تلك آيات الكتاب الحكيم
These are Verses of the Wise Book,-

هدى ورحمة للمحسنين
A Guide and a Mercy to the Doers of Good,-

الذين يقيمون الصلاة ويؤتون الزكاة وهم بالآخرة هم يوقنون
Those who establish regular Prayer, and give regular Charity, and have (in their hearts) the assurance of the Hereafter.

أولئك على هدى من ربهم وأولئك هم المفلحون
These are on (true) guidance from their Lord: and these are the ones who will prosper.

ومن الناس من يشتري لهو الحديث ليضل عن سبيل الله بغير علم ويتخذها هزوا أولئك لهم عذاب مهين
But there are, among men, those who purchase idle tales, without knowledge (or meaning), to mislead (men) from the Path of Allah and throw ridicule (on the Path): for such there will be a Humiliating Penalty.

وإذا تتلى عليه آياتنا ولى مستكبرا كأن لم يسمعها كأن في أذنيه وقرا فبشره بعذاب أليم
When Our Signs are rehearsed to such a one, he turns away in arrogance, as if he heard them not, as if there were deafness in both his ears: announce to him a grievous Penalty.

إن الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات لهم جنات النعيم
For those who believe and work righteous deeds, there will be Gardens of Bliss,-

خالدين فيها وعد الله حقا وهو العزيز الحكيم
To dwell therein. The promise of Allah is true: and He is Exalted in Power, Wise.

خلق السماوات بغير عمد ترونها وألقى في الأرض رواسي أن تميد بكم وبث فيها من كل دابة وأنزلنا من السماء ماء فأنبتنا فيها من كل زوج كريم
He created the heavens without any pillars that ye can see; He set on the earth mountains standing firm, lest it should shake with you; and He scattered through it beasts of all kinds. We send down rain from the sky, and produce on the earth every kind of noble creature, in pairs.

هذا خلق الله فأروني ماذا خلق الذين من دونه بل الظالمون في ضلال مبين
Such is the Creation of Allah: now show Me what is there that others besides Him have created: nay, but the Transgressors are in manifest error.

ولقد آتينا لقمان الحكمة أن اشكر لله ومن يشكر فإنما يشكر لنفسه ومن كفر فإن الله غني حميد
we bestowed (in the past) Wisdom on Luqman: "Show (thy) gratitude to Allah." Any who is (so) grateful does so to the profit of his own soul: but if any is ungrateful, verily Allah is free of all wants, Worthy of all praise.

وإذ قال لقمان لابنه وهو يعظه يا بني لا تشرك بالله إن الشرك لظلم عظيم
Behold, Luqman said to his son by way of instruction: "O my son! join not in worship (others) with Allah: for false worship is indeed the highest wrong-doing."

ووصينا الإنسان بوالديه حملته أمه وهنا على وهن وفصاله في عامين أن اشكر لي ولوالديك إلي المصير
And We have enjoined on man (to be good) to his parents: in travail upon travail did his mother bear him, and in years twain was his weaning: (hear the command), "Show gratitude to Me and to thy parents: to Me is (thy final) Goal.

وإن جاهداك على أن تشرك بي ما ليس لك به علم فلا تطعهما وصاحبهما في الدنيا معروفا واتبع سبيل من أناب إلي ثم إلي مرجعكم فأنبئكم بما كنتم تعملون
"But if they strive to make thee join in worship with Me things of which thou hast no knowledge, obey them not; yet bear them company in this life with justice (and consideration), and follow the way of those who turn to me (in love): in the end the return of you all is to Me, and I will tell you the truth (and meaning) of all that ye did."

يا بني إنها إن تك مثقال حبة من خردل فتكن في صخرة أو في السماوات أو في الأرض يأت بها الله إن الله لطيف خبير
"O my son!" (said Luqman), "If there be (but) the weight of a mustard-seed and it were (hidden) in a rock, or (anywhere) in the heavens or on earth, Allah will bring it forth: for Allah understands the finest mysteries, (and) is well-acquainted (with them).

يا بني أقم الصلاة وأمر بالمعروف وانه عن المنكر واصبر على ما أصابك إن ذلك من عزم الأمور
"O my son! establish regular prayer, enjoin what is just, and forbid what is wrong: and bear with patient constancy whatever betide thee; for this is firmness (of purpose) in (the conduct of) affairs.

ولا تصعر خدك للناس ولا تمش في الأرض مرحا إن الله لا يحب كل مختال فخور
"And swell not thy cheek (for pride) at men, nor walk in insolence through the earth; for Allah loveth not any arrogant boaster.

واقصد في مشيك واغضض من صوتك إن أنكر الأصوات لصوت الحمير
"And be moderate in thy pace, and lower thy voice; for the harshest of sounds without doubt is the braying of the ass."

ألم تروا أن الله سخر لكم ما في السماوات وما في الأرض وأسبغ عليكم نعمه ظاهرة وباطنة ومن الناس من يجادل في الله بغير علم ولا هدى ولا كتاب منير
Do ye not see that Allah has subjected to your (use) all things in the heavens and on earth, and has made his bounties flow to you in exceeding measure, (both) seen and unseen? Yet there are among men those who dispute about Allah, without knowledge and without guidance, and without a Book to enlighten them!

وإذا قيل لهم اتبعوا ما أنزل الله قالوا بل نتبع ما وجدنا عليه آباءنا أولو كان الشيطان يدعوهم إلى عذاب السعير
When they are told to follow the (Revelation) that Allah has sent down, they say: "Nay, we shall follow the ways that we found our fathers (following). "What! even if it is Satan beckoning them to the Penalty of the (Blazing) Fire?

ومن يسلم وجهه إلى الله وهو محسن فقد استمسك بالعروة الوثقى وإلى الله عاقبة الأمور
Whoever submits his whole self to Allah, and is a doer of good, has grasped indeed the most trustworthy hand-hold: and with Allah rests the End and Decision of (all) affairs.

ومن كفر فلا يحزنك كفره إلينا مرجعهم فننبئهم بما عملوا إن الله عليم بذات الصدور
But if any reject Faith, let not his rejection grieve thee: to Us is their return, and We shall tell them the truth of their deeds: for Allah knows well all that is in (men's) hearts.

نمتعهم قليلا ثم نضطرهم إلى عذاب غليظ
We grant them their pleasure for a little while: in the end shall We drive them to a chastisement unrelenting.

ولئن سألتهم من خلق السماوات والأرض ليقولن الله قل الحمد لله بل أكثرهم لا يعلمون
If thou ask them, who it is that created the heavens and the earth. They will certainly say, "Allah". Say: "Praise be to Allah!" But most of them understand not.

لله ما في السماوات والأرض إن الله هو الغني الحميد
To Allah belong all things in heaven and earth: verily Allah is He (that is) free of all wants, worthy of all praise.

ولو أنما في الأرض من شجرة أقلام والبحر يمده من بعده سبعة أبحر ما نفدت كلمات الله إن الله عزيز حكيم
And if all the trees on earth were pens and the ocean (were ink), with seven oceans behind it to add to its (supply), yet would not the words of Allah be exhausted (in the writing): for Allah is Exalted in Power, full of Wisdom.

ما خلقكم ولا بعثكم إلا كنفس واحدة إن الله سميع بصير
And your creation or your resurrection is in no wise but as an individual soul: for Allah is He Who hears and sees (all things).

ألم تر أن الله يولج الليل في النهار ويولج النهار في الليل وسخر الشمس والقمر كل يجري إلى أجل مسمى وأن الله بما تعملون خبير
Seest thou not that Allah merges Night into Day and he merges Day into Night; that He has subjected the sun, and the moon (to his Law), each running its course for a term appointed; and that Allah is well-acquainted with all that ye do?

ذلك بأن الله هو الحق وأن ما يدعون من دونه الباطل وأن الله هو العلي الكبير
That is because Allah is the (only) Reality, and because whatever else they invoke besides Him is Falsehood; and because Allah,- He is the Most High, Most Great.

ألم تر أن الفلك تجري في البحر بنعمت الله ليريكم من آياته إن في ذلك لآيات لكل صبار شكور
Seest thou not that the ships sail through the ocean by the Grace of Allah?- that He may show you of His Signs? Verily in this are Signs for all who constantly persevere and give thanks.

وإذا غشيهم موج كالظلل دعوا الله مخلصين له الدين فلما نجاهم إلى البر فمنهم مقتصد وما يجحد بآياتنا إلا كل ختار كفور
When a wave covers them like the canopy (of clouds), they call to Allah, offering Him sincere devotion. But when He has delivered them safely to land, there are among them those that halt between (right and wrong). But none reject Our Signs except only a perfidious ungrateful (wretch)!

يا أيها الناس اتقوا ربكم واخشوا يوما لا يجزي والد عن ولده ولا مولود هو جاز عن والده شيئا إن وعد الله حق فلا تغرنكم الحياة الدنيا ولا يغرنكم بالله الغرور
O mankind! do your duty to your Lord, and fear (the coming of) a Day when no father can avail aught for his son, nor a son avail aught for his father. Verily, the promise of Allah is true: let not then this present life deceive you, nor let the chief Deceiver deceive you about Allah.

إن الله عنده علم الساعة وينزل الغيث ويعلم ما في الأرحام وما تدري نفس ماذا تكسب غدا وما تدري نفس بأي أرض تموت إن الله عليم خبير
Verily the knowledge of the Hour is with Allah (alone). It is He Who sends down rain, and He Who knows what is in the wombs. Nor does any one know what it is that he will earn on the morrow: Nor does any one know in what land he is to die. Verily with Allah is full knowledge and He is acquainted (with all things).

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الم
A. L. M.

تنزيل الكتاب لا ريب فيه من رب العالمين
(This is) the Revelation of the Book in which there is no doubt,- from the Lord of the Worlds.

أم يقولون افتراه بل هو الحق من ربك لتنذر قوما ما أتاهم من نذير من قبلك لعلهم يهتدون
Or do they say, "He has forged it"? Nay, it is the Truth from thy Lord, that thou mayest admonish a people to whom no warner has come before thee: in order that they may receive guidance.

الله الذي خلق السماوات والأرض وما بينهما في ستة أيام ثم استوى على العرش ما لكم من دونه من ولي ولا شفيع أفلا تتذكرون
It is Allah Who has created the heavens and the earth, and all between them, in six Days, and is firmly established on the Throne (of Authority): ye have none, besides Him, to protect or intercede (for you): will ye not then receive admonition?

يدبر الأمر من السماء إلى الأرض ثم يعرج إليه في يوم كان مقداره ألف سنة مما تعدون
He rules (all) affairs from the heavens to the earth: in the end will (all affairs) go up to Him, on a Day, the space whereof will be (as) a thousand years of your reckoning.

ذلك عالم الغيب والشهادة العزيز الرحيم
Such is He, the Knower of all things, hidden and open, the Exalted (in power), the Merciful;-

الذي أحسن كل شيء خلقه وبدأ خلق الإنسان من طين
He Who has made everything which He has created most good: He began the creation of man with (nothing more than) clay,

ثم جعل نسله من سلالة من ماء مهين
And made his progeny from a quintessence of the nature of a fluid despised:

ثم سواه ونفخ فيه من روحه وجعل لكم السمع والأبصار والأفئدة قليلا ما تشكرون
But He fashioned him in due proportion, and breathed into him something of His spirit. And He gave you (the faculties of) hearing and sight and feeling (and understanding): little thanks do ye give!

وقالوا أإذا ضللنا في الأرض أإنا لفي خلق جديد بل هم بلقاء ربهم كافرون
And they say: "What! when we lie, hidden and lost, in the earth, shall we indeed be in a Creation renewed? Nay, they deny the Meeting with their Lord.

قل يتوفاكم ملك الموت الذي وكل بكم ثم إلى ربكم ترجعون
Say: "The Angel of Death, put in charge of you, will (duly) take your souls: then shall ye be brought back to your Lord."

ولو ترى إذ المجرمون ناكسو رءوسهم عند ربهم ربنا أبصرنا وسمعنا فارجعنا نعمل صالحا إنا موقنون
If only thou couldst see when the guilty ones will bend low their heads before their Lord, (saying:) "Our Lord! We have seen and we have heard: Now then send us back (to the world): we will work righteousness: for we do indeed (now) believe."

ولو شئنا لآتينا كل نفس هداها ولكن حق القول مني لأملأن جهنم من الجنة والناس أجمعين
If We had so willed, We could certainly have brought every soul its true guidance: but the Word from Me will come true, "I will fill Hell with Jinns and men all together."

فذوقوا بما نسيتم لقاء يومكم هذا إنا نسيناكم وذوقوا عذاب الخلد بما كنتم تعملون
"Taste ye then - for ye forgot the Meeting of this Day of yours, and We too will forget you - taste ye the Penalty of Eternity for your (evil) deeds!"

إنما يؤمن بآياتنا الذين إذا ذكروا بها خروا سجدا وسبحوا بحمد ربهم وهم لا يستكبرون
Only those believe in Our Signs, who, when they are recited to them, fall down in prostration, and celebrate the praises of their Lord, nor are they (ever) puffed up with pride.

تتجافى جنوبهم عن المضاجع يدعون ربهم خوفا وطمعا ومما رزقناهم ينفقون
Their limbs do forsake their beds of sleep, the while they call on their Lord, in Fear and Hope: and they spend (in charity) out of the sustenance which We have bestowed on them.

فلا تعلم نفس ما أخفي لهم من قرة أعين جزاء بما كانوا يعملون
Now no person knows what delights of the eye are kept hidden (in reserve) for them - as a reward for their (good) deeds.

أفمن كان مؤمنا كمن كان فاسقا لا يستوون
Is then the man who believes no better than the man who is rebellious and wicked? Not equal are they.

أما الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات فلهم جنات المأوى نزلا بما كانوا يعملون
For those who believe and do righteous deeds are Gardens as hospitable homes, for their (good) deeds.

وأما الذين فسقوا فمأواهم النار كلما أرادوا أن يخرجوا منها أعيدوا فيها وقيل لهم ذوقوا عذاب النار الذي كنتم به تكذبون
As to those who are rebellious and wicked, their abode will be the Fire: every time they wish to get away therefrom, they will be forced thereinto, and it will be said to them: "Taste ye the Penalty of the Fire, the which ye were wont to reject as false."

ولنذيقنهم من العذاب الأدنى دون العذاب الأكبر لعلهم يرجعون
And indeed We will make them taste of the Penalty of this (life) prior to the supreme Penalty, in order that they may (repent and) return.

ومن أظلم ممن ذكر بآيات ربه ثم أعرض عنها إنا من المجرمين منتقمون
And who does more wrong than one to whom are recited the Signs of his Lord, and who then turns away therefrom? Verily from those who transgress We shall exact (due) Retribution.

ولقد آتينا موسى الكتاب فلا تكن في مرية من لقائه وجعلناه هدى لبني إسرائيل
We did indeed aforetime give the Book to Moses: be not then in doubt of its reaching (thee): and We made it a guide to the Children of Israel.

وجعلنا منهم أئمة يهدون بأمرنا لما صبروا وكانوا بآياتنا يوقنون
And We appointed, from among them, leaders, giving guidance under Our command, so long as they persevered with patience and continued to have faith in Our Signs.

إن ربك هو يفصل بينهم يوم القيامة فيما كانوا فيه يختلفون
Verily thy Lord will judge between them on the Day of Judgment, in the matters wherein they differ (among themselves)

أولم يهد لهم كم أهلكنا من قبلهم من القرون يمشون في مساكنهم إن في ذلك لآيات أفلا يسمعون
Does it not teach them a lesson, how many generations We destroyed before them, in whose dwellings they (now) go to and fro? Verily in that are Signs: Do they not then listen?

أولم يروا أنا نسوق الماء إلى الأرض الجرز فنخرج به زرعا تأكل منه أنعامهم وأنفسهم أفلا يبصرون
And do they not see that We do drive rain to parched soil (bare of herbage), and produce therewith crops, providing food for their cattle and themselves? Have they not the vision?

ويقولون متى هذا الفتح إن كنتم صادقين
They say: "When will this decision be, if ye are telling the truth?"

قل يوم الفتح لا ينفع الذين كفروا إيمانهم ولا هم ينظرون
Say: "On the Day of Decision, no profit will it be to Unbelievers if they (then) believe! nor will they be granted a respite."

فأعرض عنهم وانتظر إنهم منتظرون
So turn away from them, and wait: they too are waiting.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم يا أيها النبي اتق الله ولا تطع الكافرين والمنافقين إن الله كان عليما حكيما
O Prophet! Fear Allah, and hearken not to the Unbelievers and the Hypocrites: verily Allah is full of Knowledge and Wisdom.

واتبع ما يوحى إليك من ربك إن الله كان بما تعملون خبيرا
But follow that which comes to thee by inspiration from thy Lord: for Allah is well acquainted with (all) that ye do.

وتوكل على الله وكفى بالله وكيلا
And put thy trust in Allah, and enough is Allah as a disposer of affairs.

ما جعل الله لرجل من قلبين في جوفه وما جعل أزواجكم اللائي تظاهرون منهن أمهاتكم وما جعل أدعياءكم أبناءكم ذلكم قولكم بأفواهكم والله يقول الحق وهو يهدي السبيل
Allah has not made for any man two hearts in his (one) body: nor has He made your wives whom ye divorce by Zihar your mothers: nor has He made your adopted sons your sons. Such is (only) your (manner of) speech by your mouths. But Allah tells (you) the Truth, and He shows the (right) Way.

ادعوهم لآبائهم هو أقسط عند الله فإن لم تعلموا آباءهم فإخوانكم في الدين ومواليكم وليس عليكم جناح فيما أخطأتم به ولكن ما تعمدت قلوبكم وكان الله غفورا رحيما
Call them by (the names of) their fathers: that is juster in the sight of Allah. But if ye know not their father's (names, call them) your Brothers in faith, or your maulas. But there is no blame on you if ye make a mistake therein: (what counts is) the intention of your hearts: and Allah is Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

النبي أولى بالمؤمنين من أنفسهم وأزواجه أمهاتهم وأولو الأرحام بعضهم أولى ببعض في كتاب الله من المؤمنين والمهاجرين إلا أن تفعلوا إلى أوليائكم معروفا كان ذلك في الكتاب مسطورا
The Prophet is closer to the Believers than their own selves, and his wives are their mothers. Blood-relations among each other have closer personal ties, in the Decree of Allah. Than (the Brotherhood of) Believers and Muhajirs: nevertheless do ye what is just to your closest friends: such is the writing in the Decree (of Allah).

وإذ أخذنا من النبيين ميثاقهم ومنك ومن نوح وإبراهيم وموسى وعيسى ابن مريم وأخذنا منهم ميثاقا غليظا
And remember We took from the prophets their covenant: As (We did) from thee: from Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus the son of Mary: We took from them a solemn covenant:

ليسأل الصادقين عن صدقهم وأعد للكافرين عذابا أليما
That (Allah) may question the (custodians) of Truth concerning the Truth they (were charged with): And He has prepared for the Unbelievers a grievous Penalty.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا اذكروا نعمة الله عليكم إذ جاءتكم جنود فأرسلنا عليهم ريحا وجنودا لم تروها وكان الله بما تعملون بصيرا
O ye who believe! Remember the Grace of Allah, (bestowed) on you, when there came down on you hosts (to overwhelm you): But We sent against them a hurricane and forces that ye saw not: but Allah sees (clearly) all that ye do.

إذ جاءوكم من فوقكم ومن أسفل منكم وإذ زاغت الأبصار وبلغت القلوب الحناجر وتظنون بالله الظنونا
Behold! they came on you from above you and from below you, and behold, the eyes became dim and the hearts gaped up to the throats, and ye imagined various (vain) thoughts about Allah!

هنالك ابتلي المؤمنون وزلزلوا زلزالا شديدا
In that situation were the Believers tried: they were shaken as by a tremendous shaking.

وإذ يقول المنافقون والذين في قلوبهم مرض ما وعدنا الله ورسوله إلا غرورا
And behold! The Hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease (even) say: "Allah and His Messenger promised us nothing but delusion!"

وإذ قالت طائفة منهم يا أهل يثرب لا مقام لكم فارجعوا ويستأذن فريق منهم النبي يقولون إن بيوتنا عورة وما هي بعورة إن يريدون إلا فرارا
Behold! A party among them said: "Ye men of Yathrib! ye cannot stand (the attack)! therefore go back!" And a band of them ask for leave of the Prophet, saying, "Truly our houses are bare and exposed," though they were not exposed they intended nothing but to run away.

ولو دخلت عليهم من أقطارها ثم سئلوا الفتنة لآتوها وما تلبثوا بها إلا يسيرا
And if an entry had been effected to them from the sides of the (city), and they had been incited to sedition, they would certainly have brought it to pass, with none but a brief delay!

ولقد كانوا عاهدوا الله من قبل لا يولون الأدبار وكان عهد الله مسئولا
And yet they had already covenanted with Allah not to turn their backs, and a covenant with Allah must (surely) be answered for.

قل لن ينفعكم الفرار إن فررتم من الموت أو القتل وإذا لا تمتعون إلا قليلا
Say: "Running away will not profit you if ye are running away from death or slaughter; and even if (ye do escape), no more than a brief (respite) will ye be allowed to enjoy!"

قل من ذا الذي يعصمكم من الله إن أراد بكم سوءا أو أراد بكم رحمة ولا يجدون لهم من دون الله وليا ولا نصيرا
Say: "Who is it that can screen you from Allah if it be His wish to give you punishment or to give you Mercy?" Nor will they find for themselves, besides Allah, any protector or helper.

قد يعلم الله المعوقين منكم والقائلين لإخوانهم هلم إلينا ولا يأتون البأس إلا قليلا
Verily Allah knows those among you who keep back (men) and those who say to their brethren, "Come along to us", but come not to the fight except for just a little while.

أشحة عليكم فإذا جاء الخوف رأيتهم ينظرون إليك تدور أعينهم كالذي يغشى عليه من الموت فإذا ذهب الخوف سلقوكم بألسنة حداد أشحة على الخير أولئك لم يؤمنوا فأحبط الله أعمالهم وكان ذلك على الله يسيرا
Covetous over you. Then when fear comes, thou wilt see them looking to thee, their eyes revolving, like (those of) one over whom hovers death: but when the fear is past, they will smite you with sharp tongues, covetous of goods. Such men have no faith, and so Allah has made their deeds of none effect: and that is easy for Allah.

يحسبون الأحزاب لم يذهبوا وإن يأت الأحزاب يودوا لو أنهم بادون في الأعراب يسألون عن أنبائكم ولو كانوا فيكم ما قاتلوا إلا قليلا
They think that the Confederates have not withdrawn; and if the Confederates should come (again), they would wish they were in the deserts (wandering) among the Bedouins, and seeking news about you (from a safe distance); and if they were in your midst, they would fight but little.

لقد كان لكم في رسول الله أسوة حسنة لمن كان يرجو الله واليوم الآخر وذكر الله كثيرا
Ye have indeed in the Messenger of Allah a beautiful pattern (of conduct) for any one whose hope is in Allah and the Final Day, and who engages much in the Praise of Allah.

ولما رأى المؤمنون الأحزاب قالوا هذا ما وعدنا الله ورسوله وصدق الله ورسوله وما زادهم إلا إيمانا وتسليما
When the Believers saw the Confederate forces, they said: "This is what Allah and his Messenger had promised us, and Allah and His Messenger told us what was true." And it only added to their faith and their zeal in obedience.

من المؤمنين رجال صدقوا ما عاهدوا الله عليه فمنهم من قضى نحبه ومنهم من ينتظر وما بدلوا تبديلا
Among the Believers are men who have been true to their covenant with Allah: of them some have completed their vow (to the extreme), and some (still) wait: but they have never changed (their determination) in the least:

ليجزي الله الصادقين بصدقهم ويعذب المنافقين إن شاء أو يتوب عليهم إن الله كان غفورا رحيما
That Allah may reward the men of Truth for their Truth, and punish the Hypocrites if that be His Will, or turn to them in Mercy: for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

ورد الله الذين كفروا بغيظهم لم ينالوا خيرا وكفى الله المؤمنين القتال وكان الله قويا عزيزا
And Allah turned back the Unbelievers for (all) their fury: no advantage did they gain; and enough is Allah for the believers in their fight. And Allah is full of Strength, able to enforce His Will.

وأنزل الذين ظاهروهم من أهل الكتاب من صياصيهم وقذف في قلوبهم الرعب فريقا تقتلون وتأسرون فريقا
And those of the People of the Book who aided them - Allah did take them down from their strongholds and cast terror into their hearts. (So that) some ye slew, and some ye made prisoners.

وأورثكم أرضهم وديارهم وأموالهم وأرضا لم تطئوها وكان الله على كل شيء قديرا
And He made you heirs of their lands, their houses, and their goods, and of a land which ye had not frequented (before). And Allah has power over all things.

يا أيها النبي قل لأزواجك إن كنتن تردن الحياة الدنيا وزينتها فتعالين أمتعكن وأسرحكن سراحا جميلا
O Prophet! Say to thy Consorts: "If it be that ye desire the life of this World, and its glitter,- then come! I will provide for your enjoyment and set you free in a handsome manner.

وإن كنتن تردن الله ورسوله والدار الآخرة فإن الله أعد للمحسنات منكن أجرا عظيما
But if ye seek Allah and His Messenger, and the Home of the Hereafter, verily Allah has prepared for the well-doers amongst you a great reward.

يا نساء النبي من يأت منكن بفاحشة مبينة يضاعف لها العذاب ضعفين وكان ذلك على الله يسيرا
O Consorts of the Prophet! If any of you were guilty of evident unseemly conduct, the Punishment would be doubled to her, and that is easy for Allah.

ومن يقنت منكن لله ورسوله وتعمل صالحا نؤتها أجرها مرتين وأعتدنا لها رزقا كريما
But any of you that is devout in the service of Allah and His Messenger, and works righteousness,- to her shall We grant her reward twice: and We have prepared for her a generous Sustenance.

يا نساء النبي لستن كأحد من النساء إن اتقيتن فلا تخضعن بالقول فيطمع الذي في قلبه مرض وقلن قولا معروفا
O Consorts of the Prophet! Ye are not like any of the (other) women: if ye do fear (Allah), be not too complacent of speech, lest one in whose heart is a disease should be moved with desire: but speak ye a speech (that is) just.

وقرن في بيوتكن ولا تبرجن تبرج الجاهلية الأولى وأقمن الصلاة وآتين الزكاة وأطعن الله ورسوله إنما يريد الله ليذهب عنكم الرجس أهل البيت ويطهركم تطهيرا
And stay quietly in your houses, and make not a dazzling display, like that of the former Times of Ignorance; and establish regular Prayer, and give regular Charity; and obey Allah and His Messenger. And Allah only wishes to remove all abomination from you, ye members of the Family, and to make you pure and spotless.

واذكرن ما يتلى في بيوتكن من آيات الله والحكمة إن الله كان لطيفا خبيرا
And recite what is rehearsed to you in your homes, of the Signs of Allah and His Wisdom: for Allah understands the finest mysteries and is well-acquainted (with them).

إن المسلمين والمسلمات والمؤمنين والمؤمنات والقانتين والقانتات والصادقين والصادقات والصابرين والصابرات والخاشعين والخاشعات والمتصدقين والمتصدقات والصائمين والصائمات والحافظين فروجهم والحافظات والذاكرين الله كثيرا والذاكرات أعد الله لهم مغفرة وأجرا عظيما
For Muslim men and women,- for believing men and women, for devout men and women, for true men and women, for men and women who are patient and constant, for men and women who humble themselves, for men and women who give in Charity, for men and women who fast (and deny themselves), for men and women who guard their chastity, and for men and women who engage much in Allah's praise,- for them has Allah prepared forgiveness and great reward.

وما كان لمؤمن ولا مؤمنة إذا قضى الله ورسوله أمرا أن يكون لهم الخيرة من أمرهم ومن يعص الله ورسوله فقد ضل ضلالا مبينا
It is not fitting for a Believer, man or woman, when a matter has been decided by Allah and His Messenger to have any option about their decision: if any one disobeys Allah and His Messenger, he is indeed on a clearly wrong Path.

وإذ تقول للذي أنعم الله عليه وأنعمت عليه أمسك عليك زوجك واتق الله وتخفي في نفسك ما الله مبديه وتخشى الناس والله أحق أن تخشاه فلما قضى زيد منها وطرا زوجناكها لكي لا يكون على المؤمنين حرج في أزواج أدعيائهم إذا قضوا منهن وطرا وكان أمر الله مفعولا
Behold! Thou didst say to one who had received the grace of Allah and thy favour: "Retain thou (in wedlock) thy wife, and fear Allah." But thou didst hide in thy heart that which Allah was about to make manifest: thou didst fear the people, but it is more fitting that thou shouldst fear Allah. Then when Zaid had dissolved (his marriage) with her, with the necessary (formality), We joined her in marriage to thee: in order that (in future) there may be no difficulty to the Believers in (the matter of) marriage with the wives of their adopted sons, when the latter have dissolved with the necessary (formality) (their marriage) with them. And Allah's command must be fulfilled.

ما كان على النبي من حرج فيما فرض الله له سنة الله في الذين خلوا من قبل وكان أمر الله قدرا مقدورا
There can be no difficulty to the Prophet in what Allah has indicated to him as a duty. It was the practice (approved) of Allah amongst those of old that have passed away. And the command of Allah is a decree determined.

الذين يبلغون رسالات الله ويخشونه ولا يخشون أحدا إلا الله وكفى بالله حسيبا
(It is the practice of those) who preach the Messages of Allah, and fear Him, and fear none but Allah. And enough is Allah to call (men) to account.

ما كان محمد أبا أحد من رجالكم ولكن رسول الله وخاتم النبيين وكان الله بكل شيء عليما
Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but (he is) the Messenger of Allah, and the Seal of the Prophets: and Allah has full knowledge of all things.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا اذكروا الله ذكرا كثيرا
O ye who believe! Celebrate the praises of Allah, and do this often;

وسبحوه بكرة وأصيلا
And glorify Him morning and evening.

هو الذي يصلي عليكم وملائكته ليخرجكم من الظلمات إلى النور وكان بالمؤمنين رحيما
He it is Who sends blessings on you, as do His angels, that He may bring you out from the depths of Darkness into Light: and He is Full of Mercy to the Believers.

تحيتهم يوم يلقونه سلام وأعد لهم أجرا كريما
Their salutation on the Day they meet Him will be "Peace!"; and He has prepared for them a generous Reward.

يا أيها النبي إنا أرسلناك شاهدا ومبشرا ونذيرا
O Prophet! Truly We have sent thee as a Witness, a Bearer of Glad Tidings, and Warner,-

وداعيا إلى الله بإذنه وسراجا منيرا
And as one who invites to Allah's (grace) by His leave, and as a lamp spreading light.

وبشر المؤمنين بأن لهم من الله فضلا كبيرا
Then give the Glad Tidings to the Believers, that they shall have from Allah a very great Bounty.

ولا تطع الكافرين والمنافقين ودع أذاهم وتوكل على الله وكفى بالله وكيلا
And obey not (the behests) of the Unbelievers and the Hypocrites, and heed not their annoyances, but put thy Trust in Allah. For enough is Allah as a Disposer of affairs.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إذا نكحتم المؤمنات ثم طلقتموهن من قبل أن تمسوهن فما لكم عليهن من عدة تعتدونها فمتعوهن وسرحوهن سراحا جميلا
O ye who believe! When ye marry believing women, and then divorce them before ye have touched them, no period of 'Iddat have ye to count in respect of them: so give them a present. And set them free in a handsome manner.

يا أيها النبي إنا أحللنا لك أزواجك اللاتي آتيت أجورهن وما ملكت يمينك مما أفاء الله عليك وبنات عمك وبنات عماتك وبنات خالك وبنات خالاتك اللاتي هاجرن معك وامرأة مؤمنة إن وهبت نفسها للنبي إن أراد النبي أن يستنكحها خالصة لك من دون المؤمنين قد علمنا ما فرضنا عليهم في أزواجهم وما ملكت أيمانهم لكيلا يكون عليك حرج وكان الله غفورا رحيما
O Prophet! We have made lawful to thee thy wives to whom thou hast paid their dowers; and those whom thy right hand possesses out of the prisoners of war whom Allah has assigned to thee; and daughters of thy paternal uncles and aunts, and daughters of thy maternal uncles and aunts, who migrated (from Makka) with thee; and any believing woman who dedicates her soul to the Prophet if the Prophet wishes to wed her;- this only for thee, and not for the Believers (at large); We know what We have appointed for them as to their wives and the captives whom their right hands possess;- in order that there should be no difficulty for thee. And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

ترجي من تشاء منهن وتؤوي إليك من تشاء ومن ابتغيت ممن عزلت فلا جناح عليك ذلك أدنى أن تقر أعينهن ولا يحزن ويرضين بما آتيتهن كلهن والله يعلم ما في قلوبكم وكان الله عليما حليما
Thou mayest defer (the turn of) any of them that thou pleasest, and thou mayest receive any thou pleasest: and there is no blame on thee if thou invite one whose (turn) thou hadst set aside. This were nigher to the cooling of their eyes, the prevention of their grief, and their satisfaction - that of all of them - with that which thou hast to give them: and Allah knows (all) that is in your hearts: and Allah is All-Knowing, Most Forbearing.

لا يحل لك النساء من بعد ولا أن تبدل بهن من أزواج ولو أعجبك حسنهن إلا ما ملكت يمينك وكان الله على كل شيء رقيبا
It is not lawful for thee (to marry more) women after this, nor to change them for (other) wives, even though their beauty attract thee, except any thy right hand should possess (as handmaidens): and Allah doth watch over all things.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تدخلوا بيوت النبي إلا أن يؤذن لكم إلى طعام غير ناظرين إناه ولكن إذا دعيتم فادخلوا فإذا طعمتم فانتشروا ولا مستأنسين لحديث إن ذلكم كان يؤذي النبي فيستحيي منكم والله لا يستحيي من الحق وإذا سألتموهن متاعا فاسألوهن من وراء حجاب ذلكم أطهر لقلوبكم وقلوبهن وما كان لكم أن تؤذوا رسول الله ولا أن تنكحوا أزواجه من بعده أبدا إن ذلكم كان عند الله عظيما
O ye who believe! Enter not the Prophet's houses,- until leave is given you,- for a meal, (and then) not (so early as) to wait for its preparation: but when ye are invited, enter; and when ye have taken your meal, disperse, without seeking familiar talk. Such (behaviour) annoys the Prophet: he is ashamed to dismiss you, but Allah is not ashamed (to tell you) the truth. And when ye ask (his ladies) for anything ye want, ask them from before a screen: that makes for greater purity for your hearts and for theirs. Nor is it right for you that ye should annoy Allah's Messenger, or that ye should marry his widows after him at any time. Truly such a thing is in Allah's sight an enormity.

إن تبدوا شيئا أو تخفوه فإن الله كان بكل شيء عليما
Whether ye reveal anything or conceal it, verily Allah has full knowledge of all things.

لا جناح عليهن في آبائهن ولا أبنائهن ولا إخوانهن ولا أبناء إخوانهن ولا أبناء أخواتهن ولا نسائهن ولا ما ملكت أيمانهن واتقين الله إن الله كان على كل شيء شهيدا
There is no blame (on these ladies if they appear) before their fathers or their sons, their brothers, or their brother's sons, or their sisters' sons, or their women, or the (slaves) whom their right hands possess. And, (ladies), fear Allah; for Allah is Witness to all things.

إن الله وملائكته يصلون على النبي يا أيها الذين آمنوا صلوا عليه وسلموا تسليما
Allah and His angels send blessings on the Prophet: O ye that believe! Send ye blessings on him, and salute him with all respect.

إن الذين يؤذون الله ورسوله لعنهم الله في الدنيا والآخرة وأعد لهم عذابا مهينا
Those who annoy Allah and His Messenger - Allah has cursed them in this World and in the Hereafter, and has prepared for them a humiliating Punishment.

والذين يؤذون المؤمنين والمؤمنات بغير ما اكتسبوا فقد احتملوا بهتانا وإثما مبينا
And those who annoy believing men and women undeservedly, bear (on themselves) a calumny and a glaring sin.

يا أيها النبي قل لأزواجك وبناتك ونساء المؤمنين يدنين عليهن من جلابيبهن ذلك أدنى أن يعرفن فلا يؤذين وكان الله غفورا رحيما
O Prophet! Tell thy wives and daughters, and the believing women, that they should cast their outer garments over their persons (when abroad): that is most convenient, that they should be known (as such) and not molested. And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

لئن لم ينته المنافقون والذين في قلوبهم مرض والمرجفون في المدينة لنغرينك بهم ثم لا يجاورونك فيها إلا قليلا
Truly, if the Hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is a disease, and those who stir up sedition in the City, desist not, We shall certainly stir thee up against them: Then will they not be able to stay in it as thy neighbours for any length of time:

ملعونين أينما ثقفوا أخذوا وقتلوا تقتيلا
They shall have a curse on them: whenever they are found, they shall be seized and slain (without mercy).

سنة الله في الذين خلوا من قبل ولن تجد لسنة الله تبديلا
(Such was) the practice (approved) of Allah among those who lived aforetime: No change wilt thou find in the practice (approved) of Allah.

يسألك الناس عن الساعة قل إنما علمها عند الله وما يدريك لعل الساعة تكون قريبا
Men ask thee concerning the Hour: Say, "The knowledge thereof is with Allah (alone)": and what will make thee understand?- perchance the Hour is nigh!

إن الله لعن الكافرين وأعد لهم سعيرا
Verily Allah has cursed the Unbelievers and prepared for them a Blazing Fire,-

خالدين فيها أبدا لا يجدون وليا ولا نصيرا
To dwell therein for ever: no protector will they find, nor helper.

يوم تقلب وجوههم في النار يقولون يا ليتنا أطعنا الله وأطعنا الرسولا
The Day that their faces will be turned upside down in the Fire, they will say: "Woe to us! Would that we had obeyed Allah and obeyed the Messenger!"

وقالوا ربنا إنا أطعنا سادتنا وكبراءنا فأضلونا السبيلا
And they would say: "Our Lord! We obeyed our chiefs and our great ones, and they misled us as to the (right) Path.

ربنا آتهم ضعفين من العذاب والعنهم لعنا كبيرا
"Our Lord! Give them double Penalty and curse them with a very great Curse!"

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تكونوا كالذين آذوا موسى فبرأه الله مما قالوا وكان عند الله وجيها
O ye who believe! Be ye not like those who vexed and insulted Moses, but Allah cleared him of the (calumnies) they had uttered: and he was honourable in Allah's sight.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا اتقوا الله وقولوا قولا سديدا
O ye who believe! Fear Allah, and (always) say a word directed to the Right:

يصلح لكم أعمالكم ويغفر لكم ذنوبكم ومن يطع الله ورسوله فقد فاز فوزا عظيما
That He may make your conduct whole and sound and forgive you your sins: He that obeys Allah and His Messenger, has already attained the highest achievement.

إنا عرضنا الأمانة على السماوات والأرض والجبال فأبين أن يحملنها وأشفقن منها وحملها الإنسان إنه كان ظلوما جهولا
We did indeed offer the Trust to the Heavens and the Earth and the Mountains; but they refused to undertake it, being afraid thereof: but man undertook it;- He was indeed unjust and foolish;-

ليعذب الله المنافقين والمنافقات والمشركين والمشركات ويتوب الله على المؤمنين والمؤمنات وكان الله غفورا رحيما
(With the result) that Allah has to punish the Hypocrites, men and women, and the Unbelievers, men and women, and Allah turns in Mercy to the Believers, men and women: for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الحمد لله الذي له ما في السماوات وما في الأرض وله الحمد في الآخرة وهو الحكيم الخبير
Praise be to Allah, to Whom belong all things in the heavens and on earth: to Him be Praise in the Hereafter: and He is Full of Wisdom, acquainted with all things.

يعلم ما يلج في الأرض وما يخرج منها وما ينزل من السماء وما يعرج فيها وهو الرحيم الغفور
He knows all that goes into the earth, and all that comes out thereof; all that comes down from the sky and all that ascends thereto and He is the Most Merciful, the Oft-Forgiving.

وقال الذين كفروا لا تأتينا الساعة قل بلى وربي لتأتينكم عالم الغيب لا يعزب عنه مثقال ذرة في السماوات ولا في الأرض ولا أصغر من ذلك ولا أكبر إلا في كتاب مبين
The Unbelievers say, "Never to us will come the Hour": Say, "Nay! but most surely, by my Lord, it will come upon you;- by Him Who knows the unseen,- from Whom is not hidden the least little atom in the heavens or on earth: Nor is there anything less than that, or greater, but is in the Record Perspicuous:

ليجزي الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات أولئك لهم مغفرة ورزق كريم
That He may reward those who believe and work deeds of righteousness: for such is Forgiveness and a Sustenance Most Generous."

والذين سعوا في آياتنا معاجزين أولئك لهم عذاب من رجز أليم
But those who strive against Our Signs, to frustrate them,- for such will be a Penalty,- a Punishment most humiliating.

ويرى الذين أوتوا العلم الذي أنزل إليك من ربك هو الحق ويهدي إلى صراط العزيز الحميد
And those to whom knowledge has come see that the (Revelation) sent down to thee from thy Lord - that is the Truth, and that it guides to the Path of the Exalted (in might), Worthy of all praise.

وقال الذين كفروا هل ندلكم على رجل ينبئكم إذا مزقتم كل ممزق إنكم لفي خلق جديد
The Unbelievers say (in ridicule): "Shall we point out to you a man that will tell you, when ye are all scattered to pieces in disintegration, that ye shall (then be raised) in a New Creation?

أفترى على الله كذبا أم به جنة بل الذين لا يؤمنون بالآخرة في العذاب والضلال البعيد
"Has he invented a falsehood against Allah, or has a spirit (seized) him?"- Nay, it is those who believe not in the Hereafter, that are in (real) Penalty, and in farthest error.

أفلم يروا إلى ما بين أيديهم وما خلفهم من السماء والأرض إن نشأ نخسف بهم الأرض أو نسقط عليهم كسفا من السماء إن في ذلك لآية لكل عبد منيب
See they not what is before them and behind them, of the sky and the earth? If We wished, We could cause the earth to swallow them up, or cause a piece of the sky to fall upon them. Verily in this is a Sign for every devotee that turns to Allah (in repentance).

ولقد آتينا داوود منا فضلا يا جبال أوبي معه والطير وألنا له الحديد
We bestowed Grace aforetime on David from ourselves: "O ye Mountains! Sing ye back the Praises of Allah with him! and ye birds (also)! And We made the iron soft for him;-

أن اعمل سابغات وقدر في السرد واعملوا صالحا إني بما تعملون بصير
(Commanding), "Make thou coast of mail, balancing well the rings of chain armour, and work ye righteousness; for be sure I see (clearly) all that ye do."

ولسليمان الريح غدوها شهر ورواحها شهر وأسلنا له عين القطر ومن الجن من يعمل بين يديه بإذن ربه ومن يزغ منهم عن أمرنا نذقه من عذاب السعير
And to Solomon (We made) the Wind (obedient): Its early morning (stride) was a month's (journey), and its evening (stride) was a month's (journey); and We made a Font of molten brass to flow for him; and there were Jinns that worked in front of him, by the leave of his Lord, and if any of them turned aside from our command, We made him taste of the Penalty of the Blazing Fire.

يعملون له ما يشاء من محاريب وتماثيل وجفان كالجواب وقدور راسيات اعملوا آل داوود شكرا وقليل من عبادي الشكور
They worked for him as he desired, (making) arches, images, basons as large as reservoirs, and (cooking) cauldrons fixed (in their places): "Work ye, sons of David, with thanks! but few of My servants are grateful!"

فلما قضينا عليه الموت ما دلهم على موته إلا دابة الأرض تأكل منسأته فلما خر تبينت الجن أن لو كانوا يعلمون الغيب ما لبثوا في العذاب المهين
Then, when We decreed (Solomon's) death, nothing showed them his death except a little worm of the earth, which kept (slowly) gnawing away at his staff: so when he fell down, the Jinns saw plainly that if they had known the unseen, they would not have tarried in the humiliating Penalty (of their Task).

لقد كان لسبإ في مسكنهم آية جنتان عن يمين وشمال كلوا من رزق ربكم واشكروا له بلدة طيبة ورب غفور
There was, for Saba, aforetime, a Sign in their home-land - two Gardens to the right and to the left. "Eat of the Sustenance (provided) by your Lord, and be grateful to Him: a territory fair and happy, and a Lord Oft-Forgiving!

فأعرضوا فأرسلنا عليهم سيل العرم وبدلناهم بجنتيهم جنتين ذواتي أكل خمط وأثل وشيء من سدر قليل
But they turned away (from Allah), and We sent against them the Flood (released) from the dams, and We converted their two garden (rows) into "gardens" producing bitter fruit, and tamarisks, and some few (stunted) Lote-trees.

ذلك جزيناهم بما كفروا وهل نجازي إلا الكفور
That was the Requital We gave them because they ungratefully rejected Faith: and never do We give (such) requital except to such as are ungrateful rejecters.

وجعلنا بينهم وبين القرى التي باركنا فيها قرى ظاهرة وقدرنا فيها السير سيروا فيها ليالي وأياما آمنين
Between them and the Cities on which We had poured our blessings, We had placed Cities in prominent positions, and between them We had appointed stages of journey in due proportion: "Travel therein, secure, by night and by day."

فقالوا ربنا باعد بين أسفارنا وظلموا أنفسهم فجعلناهم أحاديث ومزقناهم كل ممزق إن في ذلك لآيات لكل صبار شكور
But they said: "Our Lord! Place longer distances between our journey-stages": but they wronged themselves (therein). At length We made them as a tale (that is told), and We dispersed them all in scattered fragments. Verily in this are Signs for every (soul that is) patiently constant and grateful.

ولقد صدق عليهم إبليس ظنه فاتبعوه إلا فريقا من المؤمنين
And on them did Satan prove true his idea, and they followed him, all but a party that believed.

وما كان له عليهم من سلطان إلا لنعلم من يؤمن بالآخرة ممن هو منها في شك وربك على كل شيء حفيظ
But he had no authority over them,- except that We might test the man who believes in the Hereafter from him who is in doubt concerning it: and thy Lord doth watch over all things.

قل ادعوا الذين زعمتم من دون الله لا يملكون مثقال ذرة في السماوات ولا في الأرض وما لهم فيهما من شرك وما له منهم من ظهير
Say: "Call upon other (gods) whom ye fancy, besides Allah: They have no power,- not the weight of an atom,- in the heavens or on earth: No (sort of) share have they therein, nor is any of them a helper to Allah.

ولا تنفع الشفاعة عنده إلا لمن أذن له حتى إذا فزع عن قلوبهم قالوا ماذا قال ربكم قالوا الحق وهو العلي الكبير
"No intercession can avail in His Presence, except for those for whom He has granted permission. So far (is this the case) that, when terror is removed from their hearts (at the Day of Judgment, then) will they say, 'what is it that your Lord commanded?' they will say, 'That which is true and just; and He is the Most High Most Great'."

قل من يرزقكم من السماوات والأرض قل الله وإنا أو إياكم لعلى هدى أو في ضلال مبين
Say: "Who gives you sustenance, from the heavens and the earth?" Say: "It is Allah; and certain it is that either we or ye are on right guidance or in manifest error!"

قل لا تسألون عما أجرمنا ولا نسأل عما تعملون
Say: "Ye shall not be questioned as to our sins, nor shall we be questioned as to what ye do."

قل يجمع بيننا ربنا ثم يفتح بيننا بالحق وهو الفتاح العليم
Say: "Our Lord will gather us together and will in the end decide the matter between us (and you) in truth and justice: and He is the one to decide, the One Who knows all."

قل أروني الذين ألحقتم به شركاء كلا بل هو الله العزيز الحكيم
Say: "Show me those whom ye have joined with Him as partners: by no means (can ye). Nay, He is Allah, the Exalted in Power, the Wise."

وما أرسلناك إلا كافة للناس بشيرا ونذيرا ولكن أكثر الناس لا يعلمون
We have not sent thee but as a universal (Messenger) to men, giving them glad tidings, and warning them (against sin), but most men understand not.

ويقولون متى هذا الوعد إن كنتم صادقين
They say: "When will this promise (come to pass) if ye are telling the truth?"

قل لكم ميعاد يوم لا تستأخرون عنه ساعة ولا تستقدمون
Say: "The appointment to you is for a Day, which ye cannot put back for an hour nor put forward."

وقال الذين كفروا لن نؤمن بهذا القرآن ولا بالذي بين يديه ولو ترى إذ الظالمون موقوفون عند ربهم يرجع بعضهم إلى بعض القول يقول الذين استضعفوا للذين استكبروا لولا أنتم لكنا مؤمنين
The Unbelievers say: "We shall neither believe in this scripture nor in (any) that (came) before it." Couldst thou but see when the wrong-doers will be made to stand before their Lord, throwing back the word (of blame) on one another! Those who had been despised will say to the arrogant ones: "Had it not been for you, we should certainly have been believers!"

قال الذين استكبروا للذين استضعفوا أنحن صددناكم عن الهدى بعد إذ جاءكم بل كنتم مجرمين
The arrogant ones will say to those who had been despised: "Was it we who kept you back from Guidance after it reached you? Nay, rather, it was ye who transgressed.

وقال الذين استضعفوا للذين استكبروا بل مكر الليل والنهار إذ تأمروننا أن نكفر بالله ونجعل له أندادا وأسروا الندامة لما رأوا العذاب وجعلنا الأغلال في أعناق الذين كفروا هل يجزون إلا ما كانوا يعملون
Those who had been despised will say to the arrogant ones: "Nay! it was a plot (of yours) by day and by night: Behold! Ye (constantly) ordered us to be ungrateful to Allah and to attribute equals to Him!" They will declare (their) repentance when they see the Penalty: We shall put yokes on the necks of the Unbelievers: It would only be a requital for their (ill) Deeds.

وما أرسلنا في قرية من نذير إلا قال مترفوها إنا بما أرسلتم به كافرون
Never did We send a warner to a population, but the wealthy ones among them said: "We believe not in the (Message) with which ye have been sent."

وقالوا نحن أكثر أموالا وأولادا وما نحن بمعذبين
They said: "We have more in wealth and in sons, and we cannot be punished."

قل إن ربي يبسط الرزق لمن يشاء ويقدر ولكن أكثر الناس لا يعلمون
Say: "Verily my Lord enlarges and restricts the Provision to whom He pleases, but most men understand not."

وما أموالكم ولا أولادكم بالتي تقربكم عندنا زلفى إلا من آمن وعمل صالحا فأولئك لهم جزاء الضعف بما عملوا وهم في الغرفات آمنون
It is not your wealth nor your sons, that will bring you nearer to Us in degree: but only those who believe and work righteousness - these are the ones for whom there is a multiplied Reward for their deeds, while secure they (reside) in the dwellings on high!

والذين يسعون في آياتنا معاجزين أولئك في العذاب محضرون
Those who strive against Our Signs, to frustrate them, will be given over into Punishment.

قل إن ربي يبسط الرزق لمن يشاء من عباده ويقدر له وما أنفقتم من شيء فهو يخلفه وهو خير الرازقين
Say: "Verily my Lord enlarges and restricts the Sustenance to such of his servants as He pleases: and nothing do ye spend in the least (in His cause) but He replaces it: for He is the Best of those who grant Sustenance.

ويوم يحشرهم جميعا ثم يقول للملائكة أهؤلاء إياكم كانوا يعبدون
One Day He will gather them all together, and say to the angels, "Was it you that these men used to worship?"

قالوا سبحانك أنت ولينا من دونهم بل كانوا يعبدون الجن أكثرهم بهم مؤمنون
They will say, "Glory to Thee! our (tie) is with Thee - as Protector - not with them. Nay, but they worshipped the Jinns: most of them believed in them."

فاليوم لا يملك بعضكم لبعض نفعا ولا ضرا ونقول للذين ظلموا ذوقوا عذاب النار التي كنتم بها تكذبون
So on that Day no power shall they have over each other, for profit or harm: and We shall say to the wrong-doers, "Taste ye the Penalty of the Fire,- the which ye were wont to deny!"

وإذا تتلى عليهم آياتنا بينات قالوا ما هذا إلا رجل يريد أن يصدكم عما كان يعبد آباؤكم وقالوا ما هذا إلا إفك مفترى وقال الذين كفروا للحق لما جاءهم إن هذا إلا سحر مبين
When Our Clear Signs are rehearsed to them, they say, "This is only a man who wishes to hinder you from the (worship) which your fathers practised." And they say, "This is only a falsehood invented!" and the Unbelievers say of the Truth when it comes to them, "This is nothing but evident magic!"

وما آتيناهم من كتب يدرسونها وما أرسلنا إليهم قبلك من نذير
But We had not given them Books which they could study, nor sent messengers to them before thee as Warners.

وكذب الذين من قبلهم وما بلغوا معشار ما آتيناهم فكذبوا رسلي فكيف كان نكير
And their predecessors rejected (the Truth); these have not received a tenth of what We had granted to those: yet when they rejected My messengers, how (terrible) was My rejection (of them)!

قل إنما أعظكم بواحدة أن تقوموا لله مثنى وفرادى ثم تتفكروا ما بصاحبكم من جنة إن هو إلا نذير لكم بين يدي عذاب شديد
Say: "I do admonish you on one point: that ye do stand up before Allah,- (It may be) in pairs, or (it may be) singly,- and reflect (within yourselves): your Companion is not possessed: he is no less than a warner to you, in face of a terrible Penalty."

قل ما سألتكم من أجر فهو لكم إن أجري إلا على الله وهو على كل شيء شهيد
Say: "No reward do I ask of you: it is (all) in your interest: my reward is only due from Allah: And He is witness to all things."

قل إن ربي يقذف بالحق علام الغيوب
Say: "Verily my Lord doth cast the (mantle of) Truth (over His servants),- He that has full knowledge of (all) that is hidden."

قل جاء الحق وما يبدئ الباطل وما يعيد
Say: "The Truth has arrived, and Falsehood neither creates anything new, nor restores anything."

قل إن ضللت فإنما أضل على نفسي وإن اهتديت فبما يوحي إلي ربي إنه سميع قريب
Say: "If I am astray, I only stray to the loss of my own soul: but if I receive guidance, it is because of the inspiration of my Lord to me: it is He Who hears all things, and is (ever) near."

ولو ترى إذ فزعوا فلا فوت وأخذوا من مكان قريب
If thou couldst but see when they will quake with terror; but then there will be no escape (for them), and they will be seized from a position (quite) near.

وقالوا آمنا به وأنى لهم التناوش من مكان بعيد
And they will say, "We do believe (now) in the (Truth)"; but how could they receive (Faith) from a position (so far off,-

وقد كفروا به من قبل ويقذفون بالغيب من مكان بعيد
Seeing that they did reject Faith (entirely) before, and that they (continually) cast (slanders) on the unseen from a position far off?

وحيل بينهم وبين ما يشتهون كما فعل بأشياعهم من قبل إنهم كانوا في شك مريب
And between them and their desires, is placed a barrier, as was done in the past with their partisans: for they were indeed in suspicious (disquieting) doubt.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الحمد لله فاطر السماوات والأرض جاعل الملائكة رسلا أولي أجنحة مثنى وثلاث ورباع يزيد في الخلق ما يشاء إن الله على كل شيء قدير
Praise be to Allah, Who created (out of nothing) the heavens and the earth, Who made the angels, messengers with wings,- two, or three, or four (pairs): He adds to Creation as He pleases: for Allah has power over all things.

ما يفتح الله للناس من رحمة فلا ممسك لها وما يمسك فلا مرسل له من بعده وهو العزيز الحكيم
What Allah out of his Mercy doth bestow on mankind there is none can withhold: what He doth withhold, there is none can grant, apart from Him: and He is the Exalted in Power, full of Wisdom.

يا أيها الناس اذكروا نعمت الله عليكم هل من خالق غير الله يرزقكم من السماء والأرض لا إله إلا هو فأنى تؤفكون
O men! Call to mind the grace of Allah unto you! is there a creator, other than Allah, to give you sustenance from heaven or earth? There is no god but He: how then are ye deluded away from the Truth?

وإن يكذبوك فقد كذبت رسل من قبلك وإلى الله ترجع الأمور
And if they reject thee, so were messengers rejected before thee: to Allah back for decision all affairs.

يا أيها الناس إن وعد الله حق فلا تغرنكم الحياة الدنيا ولا يغرنكم بالله الغرور
O men! Certainly the promise of Allah is true. Let not then this present life deceive you, nor let the Chief Deceiver deceive you about Allah.

إن الشيطان لكم عدو فاتخذوه عدوا إنما يدعو حزبه ليكونوا من أصحاب السعير
Verily Satan is an enemy to you: so treat him as an enemy. He only invites his adherents, that they may become Companions of the Blazing Fire.

الذين كفروا لهم عذاب شديد والذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات لهم مغفرة وأجر كبير
For those who reject Allah, is a terrible Penalty: but for those who believe and work righteous deeds, is Forgiveness, and a magnificent Reward.

أفمن زين له سوء عمله فرآه حسنا فإن الله يضل من يشاء ويهدي من يشاء فلا تذهب نفسك عليهم حسرات إن الله عليم بما يصنعون
Is he, then, to whom the evil of his conduct is made alluring, so that he looks upon it as good, (equal to one who is rightly guided)? For Allah leaves to stray whom He wills, and guides whom He wills. So let not thy soul go out in (vainly) sighing after them: for Allah knows well all that they do!

والله الذي أرسل الرياح فتثير سحابا فسقناه إلى بلد ميت فأحيينا به الأرض بعد موتها كذلك النشور
It is Allah Who sends forth the Winds, so that they raise up the Clouds, and We drive them to a land that is dead, and revive the earth therewith after its death: even so (will be) the Resurrection!

من كان يريد العزة فلله العزة جميعا إليه يصعد الكلم الطيب والعمل الصالح يرفعه والذين يمكرون السيئات لهم عذاب شديد ومكر أولئك هو يبور
If any do seek for glory and power,- to Allah belong all glory and power. To Him mount up (all) Words of Purity: It is He Who exalts each Deed of Righteousness. Those that lay Plots of Evil,- for them is a Penalty terrible; and the plotting of such will be void (of result).

والله خلقكم من تراب ثم من نطفة ثم جعلكم أزواجا وما تحمل من أنثى ولا تضع إلا بعلمه وما يعمر من معمر ولا ينقص من عمره إلا في كتاب إن ذلك على الله يسير
And Allah did create you from dust; then from a sperm-drop; then He made you in pairs. And no female conceives, or lays down (her load), but with His knowledge. Nor is a man long-lived granted length of days, nor is a part cut off from his life, but is in a Decree (ordained). All this is easy to Allah.

وما يستوي البحران هذا عذب فرات سائغ شرابه وهذا ملح أجاج ومن كل تأكلون لحما طريا وتستخرجون حلية تلبسونها وترى الفلك فيه مواخر لتبتغوا من فضله ولعلكم تشكرون
Nor are the two bodies of flowing water alike,- the one palatable, sweet, and pleasant to drink, and the other, salt and bitter. Yet from each (kind of water) do ye eat flesh fresh and tender, and ye extract ornaments to wear; and thou seest the ships therein that plough the waves, that ye may seek (thus) of the Bounty of Allah that ye may be grateful.

يولج الليل في النهار ويولج النهار في الليل وسخر الشمس والقمر كل يجري لأجل مسمى ذلكم الله ربكم له الملك والذين تدعون من دونه ما يملكون من قطمير
He merges Night into Day, and he merges Day into Night, and he has subjected the sun and the moon (to his Law): each one runs its course for a term appointed. Such is Allah your Lord: to Him belongs all Dominion. And those whom ye invoke besides Him have not the least power.

إن تدعوهم لا يسمعوا دعاءكم ولو سمعوا ما استجابوا لكم ويوم القيامة يكفرون بشرككم ولا ينبئك مثل خبير
If ye invoke them, they will not listen to your call, and if they were to listen, they cannot answer your (prayer). On the Day of Judgment they will reject your "Partnership". and none, (O man!) can tell thee (the Truth) like the One Who is acquainted with all things.

يا أيها الناس أنتم الفقراء إلى الله والله هو الغني الحميد
O ye men! It is ye that have need of Allah: but Allah is the One Free of all wants, worthy of all praise.

إن يشأ يذهبكم ويأت بخلق جديد
If He so pleased, He could blot you out and bring in a New Creation.

وما ذلك على الله بعزيز
Nor is that (at all) difficult for Allah.

ولا تزر وازرة وزر أخرى وإن تدع مثقلة إلى حملها لا يحمل منه شيء ولو كان ذا قربى إنما تنذر الذين يخشون ربهم بالغيب وأقاموا الصلاة ومن تزكى فإنما يتزكى لنفسه وإلى الله المصير
Nor can a bearer of burdens bear another's burdens if one heavily laden should call another to (bear) his load. Not the least portion of it can be carried (by the other). Even though he be nearly related. Thou canst but admonish such as fear their Lord unseen and establish regular Prayer. And whoever purifies himself does so for the benefit of his own soul; and the destination (of all) is to Allah.

وما يستوي الأعمى والبصير
The blind and the seeing are not alike;

ولا الظلمات ولا النور
Nor are the depths of Darkness and the Light;

ولا الظل ولا الحرور
Nor are the (chilly) shade and the (genial) heat of the sun:

وما يستوي الأحياء ولا الأموات إن الله يسمع من يشاء وما أنت بمسمع من في القبور
Nor are alike those that are living and those that are dead. Allah can make any that He wills to hear; but thou canst not make those to hear who are (buried) in graves.

إن أنت إلا نذير
Thou art no other than a warner.

إنا أرسلناك بالحق بشيرا ونذيرا وإن من أمة إلا خلا فيها نذير
Verily We have sent thee in truth, as a bearer of glad tidings, and as a warner: and there never was a people, without a warner having lived among them (in the past).

وإن يكذبوك فقد كذب الذين من قبلهم جاءتهم رسلهم بالبينات وبالزبر وبالكتاب المنير
And if they reject thee, so did their predecessors, to whom came their messengers with Clear Signs, Books of dark prophecies, and the Book of Enlightenment.

ثم أخذت الذين كفروا فكيف كان نكير
In the end did I punish those who rejected Faith: and how (terrible) was My rejection (of them)!

ألم تر أن الله أنزل من السماء ماء فأخرجنا به ثمرات مختلفا ألوانها ومن الجبال جدد بيض وحمر مختلف ألوانها وغرابيب سود
Seest thou not that Allah sends down rain from the sky? With it We then bring out produce of various colours. And in the mountains are tracts white and red, of various shades of colour, and black intense in hue.

ومن الناس والدواب والأنعام مختلف ألوانه كذلك إنما يخشى الله من عباده العلماء إن الله عزيز غفور
And so amongst men and crawling creatures and cattle, are they of various colours. Those truly fear Allah, among His Servants, who have knowledge: for Allah is Exalted in Might, Oft-Forgiving.

إن الذين يتلون كتاب الله وأقاموا الصلاة وأنفقوا مما رزقناهم سرا وعلانية يرجون تجارة لن تبور
Those who rehearse the Book of Allah, establish regular Prayer, and spend (in Charity) out of what We have provided for them, secretly and openly, hope for a commerce that will never fail:

ليوفيهم أجورهم ويزيدهم من فضله إنه غفور شكور
For He will pay them their meed, nay, He will give them (even) more out of His Bounty: for He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Ready to appreciate (service).

والذي أوحينا إليك من الكتاب هو الحق مصدقا لما بين يديه إن الله بعباده لخبير بصير
That which We have revealed to thee of the Book is the Truth,- confirming what was (revealed) before it: for Allah is assuredly- with respect to His Servants - well acquainted and Fully Observant.

ثم أورثنا الكتاب الذين اصطفينا من عبادنا فمنهم ظالم لنفسه ومنهم مقتصد ومنهم سابق بالخيرات بإذن الله ذلك هو الفضل الكبير
Then We have given the Book for inheritance to such of Our Servants as We have chosen: but there are among them some who wrong their own souls; some who follow a middle course; and some who are, by Allah's leave, foremost in good deeds; that is the highest Grace.

جنات عدن يدخلونها يحلون فيها من أساور من ذهب ولؤلؤا ولباسهم فيها حرير
Gardens of Eternity will they enter: therein will they be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls; and their garments there will be of silk.

وقالوا الحمد لله الذي أذهب عنا الحزن إن ربنا لغفور شكور
And they will say: "Praise be to Allah, Who has removed from us (all) sorrow: for our Lord is indeed Oft-Forgiving Ready to appreciate (service):

الذي أحلنا دار المقامة من فضله لا يمسنا فيها نصب ولا يمسنا فيها لغوب
"Who has, out of His Bounty, settled us in a Home that will last: no toil nor sense of weariness shall touch us therein."

والذين كفروا لهم نار جهنم لا يقضى عليهم فيموتوا ولا يخفف عنهم من عذابها كذلك نجزي كل كفور
But those who reject (Allah) - for them will be the Fire of Hell: No term shall be determined for them, so they should die, nor shall its Penalty be lightened for them. Thus do We reward every ungrateful one!

وهم يصطرخون فيها ربنا أخرجنا نعمل صالحا غير الذي كنا نعمل أولم نعمركم ما يتذكر فيه من تذكر وجاءكم النذير فذوقوا فما للظالمين من نصير
Therein will they cry aloud (for assistance): "Our Lord! Bring us out: we shall work righteousness, not the (deeds) we used to do!" - "Did We not give you long enough life so that he that would should receive admonition? and (moreover) the warner came to you. So taste ye (the fruits of your deeds): for the wrong-doers there is no helper."

إن الله عالم غيب السماوات والأرض إنه عليم بذات الصدور
Verily Allah knows (all) the hidden things of the heavens and the earth: verily He has full knowledge of all that is in (men's) hearts.

هو الذي جعلكم خلائف في الأرض فمن كفر فعليه كفره ولا يزيد الكافرين كفرهم عند ربهم إلا مقتا ولا يزيد الكافرين كفرهم إلا خسارا
He it is That has made you inheritors in the earth: if, then, any do reject (Allah), their rejection (works) against themselves: their rejection but adds to the odium for the Unbelievers in the sight of their Lord: their rejection but adds to (their own) undoing.

قل أرأيتم شركاءكم الذين تدعون من دون الله أروني ماذا خلقوا من الأرض أم لهم شرك في السماوات أم آتيناهم كتابا فهم على بينت منه بل إن يعد الظالمون بعضهم بعضا إلا غرورا
Say: "Have ye seen (these) 'Partners' of yours whom ye call upon besides Allah? Show Me what it is they have created in the (wide) earth. Or have they a share in the heavens? Or have We given them a Book from which they (can derive) clear (evidence)?- Nay, the wrong-doers promise each other nothing but delusions.

إن الله يمسك السماوات والأرض أن تزولا ولئن زالتا إن أمسكهما من أحد من بعده إنه كان حليما غفورا
It is Allah Who sustains the heavens and the earth, lest they cease (to function): and if they should fail, there is none - not one - can sustain them thereafter: Verily He is Most Forbearing, Oft-Forgiving.

وأقسموا بالله جهد أيمانهم لئن جاءهم نذير ليكونن أهدى من إحدى الأمم فلما جاءهم نذير ما زادهم إلا نفورا
They swore their strongest oaths by Allah that if a warner came to them, they would follow his guidance better than any (other) of the Peoples: But when a warner came to them, it has only increased their flight (from righteousness),-

استكبارا في الأرض ومكر السيئ ولا يحيق المكر السيئ إلا بأهله فهل ينظرون إلا سنت الأولين فلن تجد لسنت الله تبديلا ولن تجد لسنت الله تحويلا
On account of their arrogance in the land and their plotting of Evil, but the plotting of Evil will hem in only the authors thereof. Now are they but looking for the way the ancients were dealt with? But no change wilt thou find in Allah's way (of dealing): no turning off wilt thou find in Allah's way (of dealing).

أولم يسيروا في الأرض فينظروا كيف كان عاقبة الذين من قبلهم وكانوا أشد منهم قوة وما كان الله ليعجزه من شيء في السماوات ولا في الأرض إنه كان عليما قديرا
Do they not travel through the earth, and see what was the End of those before them,- though they were superior to them in strength? Nor is Allah to be frustrated by anything whatever in the heavens or on earth: for He is All-Knowing. All-Powerful.

ولو يؤاخذ الله الناس بما كسبوا ما ترك على ظهرها من دابة ولكن يؤخرهم إلى أجل مسمى فإذا جاء أجلهم فإن الله كان بعباده بصيرا
If Allah were to punish men according to what they deserve. He would not leave on the back of the (earth) a single living creature: but He gives them respite for a stated Term: when their Term expires, verily Allah has in His sight all His Servants.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم يس
Ya Sin.

والقرآن الحكيم
By the Qur'an, full of Wisdom,-

إنك لمن المرسلين
Thou art indeed one of the messengers,

على صراط مستقيم
On a Straight Way.

تنزيل العزيز الرحيم
It is a Revelation sent down by (Him), the Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.

لتنذر قوما ما أنذر آباؤهم فهم غافلون
In order that thou mayest admonish a people, whose fathers had received no admonition, and who therefore remain heedless (of the Signs of Allah).

لقد حق القول على أكثرهم فهم لا يؤمنون
The Word is proved true against the greater part of them: for they do not believe.

إنا جعلنا في أعناقهم أغلالا فهي إلى الأذقان فهم مقمحون
We have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins, so that their heads are forced up (and they cannot see).

وجعلنا من بين أيديهم سدا ومن خلفهم سدا فأغشيناهم فهم لا يبصرون
And We have put a bar in front of them and a bar behind them, and further, We have covered them up; so that they cannot see.

وسواء عليهم أأنذرتهم أم لم تنذرهم لا يؤمنون
The same is it to them whether thou admonish them or thou do not admonish them: they will not believe.

إنما تنذر من اتبع الذكر وخشي الرحمن بالغيب فبشره بمغفرة وأجر كريم
Thou canst but admonish such a one as follows the Message and fears the (Lord) Most Gracious, unseen: give such a one, therefore, good tidings, of Forgiveness and a Reward most generous.

إنا نحن نحيي الموتى ونكتب ما قدموا وآثارهم وكل شيء أحصيناه في إمام مبين
Verily We shall give life to the dead, and We record that which they send before and that which they leave behind, and of all things have We taken account in a clear Book (of evidence).

واضرب لهم مثلا أصحاب القرية إذ جاءها المرسلون
Set forth to them, by way of a parable, the (story of) the Companions of the City. Behold!, there came messengers to it.

إذ أرسلنا إليهم اثنين فكذبوهما فعززنا بثالث فقالوا إنا إليكم مرسلون
When We (first) sent to them two messengers, they rejected them: But We strengthened them with a third: they said, "Truly, we have been sent on a mission to you."

قالوا ما أنتم إلا بشر مثلنا وما أنزل الرحمن من شيء إن أنتم إلا تكذبون
The (people) said: "Ye are only men like ourselves; and (Allah) Most Gracious sends no sort of revelation: ye do nothing but lie."

قالوا ربنا يعلم إنا إليكم لمرسلون
They said: "Our Lord doth know that we have been sent on a mission to you:

وما علينا إلا البلاغ المبين
"And our duty is only to proclaim the clear Message."

قالوا إنا تطيرنا بكم لئن لم تنتهوا لنرجمنكم وليمسنكم منا عذاب أليم
The (people) said: "for us, we augur an evil omen from you: if ye desist not, we will certainly stone you. And a grievous punishment indeed will be inflicted on you by us."

قالوا طائركم معكم أئن ذكرتم بل أنتم قوم مسرفون
They said: "Your evil omens are with yourselves: (deem ye this an evil omen). If ye are admonished? Nay, but ye are a people transgressing all bounds!"

وجاء من أقصى المدينة رجل يسعى قال يا قوم اتبعوا المرسلين
Then there came running, from the farthest part of the City, a man, saying, "O my people! Obey the messengers:

اتبعوا من لا يسألكم أجرا وهم مهتدون
"Obey those who ask no reward of you (for themselves), and who have themselves received Guidance.

وما لي لا أعبد الذي فطرني وإليه ترجعون
"It would not be reasonable in me if I did not serve Him Who created me, and to Whom ye shall (all) be brought back.

أأتخذ من دونه آلهة إن يردن الرحمن بضر لا تغن عني شفاعتهم شيئا ولا ينقذون
"Shall I take (other) gods besides Him? If (Allah) Most Gracious should intend some adversity for me, of no use whatever will be their intercession for me, nor can they deliver me.

إني إذا لفي ضلال مبين
"I would indeed, if I were to do so, be in manifest Error.

إني آمنت بربكم فاسمعون
"For me, I have faith in the Lord of you (all): listen, then, to me!"

قيل ادخل الجنة قال يا ليت قومي يعلمون
It was said: "Enter thou the Garden." He said: "Ah me! Would that my People knew (what I know)!-

بما غفر لي ربي وجعلني من المكرمين
"For that my Lord has granted me Forgiveness and has enrolled me among those held in honour!"

وما أنزلنا على قومه من بعده من جند من السماء وما كنا منزلين
And We sent not down against his People, after him, any hosts from heaven, nor was it needful for Us so to do.

إن كانت إلا صيحة واحدة فإذا هم خامدون
It was no more than a single mighty Blast, and behold! they were (like ashes) quenched and silent.

يا حسرة على العباد ما يأتيهم من رسول إلا كانوا به يستهزئون
Ah! Alas for (My) Servants! There comes not a messenger to them but they mock him!

ألم يروا كم أهلكنا قبلهم من القرون أنهم إليهم لا يرجعون
See they not how many generations before them we destroyed? Not to them will they return:

وإن كل لما جميع لدينا محضرون
But each one of them all - will be brought before Us (for judgment).

وآية لهم الأرض الميتة أحييناها وأخرجنا منها حبا فمنه يأكلون
A Sign for them is the earth that is dead: We do give it life, and produce grain therefrom, of which ye do eat.

وجعلنا فيها جنات من نخيل وأعناب وفجرنا فيها من العيون
And We produce therein orchard with date-palms and vines, and We cause springs to gush forth therein:

ليأكلوا من ثمره وما عملته أيديهم أفلا يشكرون
That they may enjoy the fruits of this (artistry): It was not their hands that made this: will they not then give thanks?

سبحان الذي خلق الأزواج كلها مما تنبت الأرض ومن أنفسهم ومما لا يعلمون
Glory to Allah, Who created in pairs all things that the earth produces, as well as their own (human) kind and (other) things of which they have no knowledge.

وآية لهم الليل نسلخ منه النهار فإذا هم مظلمون
And a Sign for them is the Night: We withdraw therefrom the Day, and behold they are plunged in darkness;

والشمس تجري لمستقر لها ذلك تقدير العزيز العليم
And the sun runs his course for a period determined for him: that is the decree of (Him), the Exalted in Might, the All-Knowing.

والقمر قدرناه منازل حتى عاد كالعرجون القديم
And the Moon,- We have measured for her mansions (to traverse) till she returns like the old (and withered) lower part of a date-stalk.

لا الشمس ينبغي لها أن تدرك القمر ولا الليل سابق النهار وكل في فلك يسبحون
It is not permitted to the Sun to catch up the Moon, nor can the Night outstrip the Day: Each (just) swims along in (its own) orbit (according to Law).

وآية لهم أنا حملنا ذريتهم في الفلك المشحون
And a Sign for them is that We bore their race (through the Flood) in the loaded Ark;

وخلقنا لهم من مثله ما يركبون
And We have created for them similar (vessels) on which they ride.

وإن نشأ نغرقهم فلا صريخ لهم ولا هم ينقذون
If it were Our Will, We could drown them: then would there be no helper (to hear their cry), nor could they be delivered,

إلا رحمة منا ومتاعا إلى حين
Except by way of Mercy from Us, and by way of (world) convenience (to serve them) for a time.

وإذا قيل لهم اتقوا ما بين أيديكم وما خلفكم لعلكم ترحمون
When they are told, "Fear ye that which is before you and that which will be after you, in order that ye may receive Mercy," (they turn back).

وما تأتيهم من آية من آيات ربهم إلا كانوا عنها معرضين
Not a Sign comes to them from among the Signs of their Lord, but they turn away therefrom.

وإذا قيل لهم أنفقوا مما رزقكم الله قال الذين كفروا للذين آمنوا أنطعم من لو يشاء الله أطعمه إن أنتم إلا في ضلال مبين
And when they are told, "Spend ye of (the bounties) with which Allah has provided you," the Unbelievers say to those who believe: "Shall we then feed those whom, if Allah had so willed, He would have fed, (Himself)?- Ye are in nothing but manifest error."

ويقولون متى هذا الوعد إن كنتم صادقين
Further, they say, "When will this promise (come to pass), if what ye say is true?"

ما ينظرون إلا صيحة واحدة تأخذهم وهم يخصمون
They will not (have to) wait for aught but a single Blast: it will seize them while they are yet disputing among themselves!

فلا يستطيعون توصية ولا إلى أهلهم يرجعون
No (chance) will they then have, by will, to dispose (of their affairs), nor to return to their own people!

ونفخ في الصور فإذا هم من الأجداث إلى ربهم ينسلون
The trumpet shall be sounded, when behold! from the sepulchres (men) will rush forth to their Lord!

قالوا يا ويلنا من بعثنا من مرقدنا هذا ما وعد الرحمن وصدق المرسلون
They will say: "Ah! Woe unto us! Who hath raised us up from our beds of repose?"... (A voice will say:) "This is what (Allah) Most Gracious had promised. And true was the word of the messengers!"

إن كانت إلا صيحة واحدة فإذا هم جميع لدينا محضرون
It will be no more than a single Blast, when lo! they will all be brought up before Us!

فاليوم لا تظلم نفس شيئا ولا تجزون إلا ما كنتم تعملون
Then, on that Day, not a soul will be wronged in the least, and ye shall but be repaid the meeds of your past Deeds.

إن أصحاب الجنة اليوم في شغل فاكهون
Verily the Companions of the Garden shall that Day have joy in all that they do;

هم وأزواجهم في ظلال على الأرائك متكئون
They and their associates will be in groves of (cool) shade, reclining on Thrones (of dignity);

لهم فيها فاكهة ولهم ما يدعون
(Every) fruit (enjoyment) will be there for them; they shall have whatever they call for;

سلام قولا من رب رحيم
"Peace!" - a word (of salutation) from a Lord Most Merciful!

وامتازوا اليوم أيها المجرمون
"And O ye in sin! Get ye apart this Day!

ألم أعهد إليكم يا بني آدم أن لا تعبدوا الشيطان إنه لكم عدو مبين
"Did I not enjoin on you, O ye Children of Adam, that ye should not worship Satan; for that he was to you an enemy avowed?-

وأن اعبدوني هذا صراط مستقيم
"And that ye should worship Me, (for that) this was the Straight Way?

ولقد أضل منكم جبلا كثيرا أفلم تكونوا تعقلون
"But he did lead astray a great multitude of you. Did ye not, then, understand?

هذه جهنم التي كنتم توعدون
"This is the Hell of which ye were (repeatedly) warned!

اصلوها اليوم بما كنتم تكفرون
"Embrace ye the (fire) this Day, for that ye (persistently) rejected (Truth)."

اليوم نختم على أفواههم وتكلمنا أيديهم وتشهد أرجلهم بما كانوا يكسبون
That Day shall We set a seal on their mouths. But their hands will speak to us, and their feet bear witness, to all that they did.

ولو نشاء لطمسنا على أعينهم فاستبقوا الصراط فأنى يبصرون
If it had been our Will, We could surely have blotted out their eyes; then should they have run about groping for the Path, but how could they have seen?

ولو نشاء لمسخناهم على مكانتهم فما استطاعوا مضيا ولا يرجعون
And if it had been Our Will, We could have transformed them (to remain) in their places; then should they have been unable to move about, nor could they have returned (after error).

ومن نعمره ننكسه في الخلق أفلا يعقلون
If We grant long life to any, We cause him to be reversed in nature: Will they not then understand?

وما علمناه الشعر وما ينبغي له إن هو إلا ذكر وقرآن مبين
We have not instructed the (Prophet) in Poetry, nor is it meet for him: this is no less than a Message and a Qur'an making things clear:

لينذر من كان حيا ويحق القول على الكافرين
That it may give admonition to any (who are) alive, and that the charge may be proved against those who reject (Truth).

أولم يروا أنا خلقنا لهم مما عملت أيدينا أنعاما فهم لها مالكون
See they not that it is We Who have created for them - among the things which Our hands have fashioned - cattle, which are under their dominion?-

وذللناها لهم فمنها ركوبهم ومنها يأكلون
And that We have subjected them to their (use)? of them some do carry them and some they eat:

ولهم فيها منافع ومشارب أفلا يشكرون
And they have (other) profits from them (besides), and they get (milk) to drink. Will they not then be grateful?

واتخذوا من دون الله آلهة لعلهم ينصرون
Yet they take (for worship) gods other than Allah, (hoping) that they might be helped!

لا يستطيعون نصرهم وهم لهم جند محضرون
They have not the power to help them: but they will be brought up (before Our Judgment-seat) as a troop (to be condemned).

فلا يحزنك قولهم إنا نعلم ما يسرون وما يعلنون
Let not their speech, then, grieve thee. Verily We know what they hide as well as what they disclose.

أولم ير الإنسان أنا خلقناه من نطفة فإذا هو خصيم مبين
Doth not man see that it is We Who created him from sperm? yet behold! he (stands forth) as an open adversary!

وضرب لنا مثلا ونسي خلقه قال من يحيي العظام وهي رميم
And he makes comparisons for Us, and forgets his own (origin and) Creation: He says, "Who can give life to (dry) bones and decomposed ones (at that)?"

قل يحييها الذي أنشأها أول مرة وهو بكل خلق عليم
Say, "He will give them life Who created them for the first time! for He is Well-versed in every kind of creation!-

الذي جعل لكم من الشجر الأخضر نارا فإذا أنتم منه توقدون
"The same Who produces for you fire out of the green tree, when behold! ye kindle therewith (your own fires)!

أوليس الذي خلق السماوات والأرض بقادر على أن يخلق مثلهم بلى وهو الخلاق العليم
"Is not He Who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like thereof?" - Yea, indeed! for He is the Creator Supreme, of skill and knowledge (infinite)!

إنما أمره إذا أراد شيئا أن يقول له كن فيكون
Verily, when He intends a thing, His Command is, "be", and it is!

فسبحان الذي بيده ملكوت كل شيء وإليه ترجعون
So glory to Him in Whose hands is the dominion of all things: and to Him will ye be all brought back.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم والصافات صفا
By those who range themselves in ranks,

فالزاجرات زجرا
And so are strong in repelling (evil),

فالتاليات ذكرا
And thus proclaim the Message (of Allah)!

إن إلهكم لواحد
Verily, verily, your Allah is one!-

رب السماوات والأرض وما بينهما ورب المشارق
Lord of the heavens and of the earth and all between them, and Lord of every point at the rising of the sun!

إنا زينا السماء الدنيا بزينة الكواكب
We have indeed decked the lower heaven with beauty (in) the stars,-

وحفظا من كل شيطان مارد
(For beauty) and for guard against all obstinate rebellious evil spirits,

لا يسمعون إلى الملإ الأعلى ويقذفون من كل جانب
(So) they should not strain their ears in the direction of the Exalted Assembly but be cast away from every side,

دحورا ولهم عذاب واصب
Repulsed, for they are under a perpetual penalty,

إلا من خطف الخطفة فأتبعه شهاب ثاقب
Except such as snatch away something by stealth, and they are pursued by a flaming fire, of piercing brightness.

فاستفتهم أهم أشد خلقا أم من خلقنا إنا خلقناهم من طين لازب
Just ask their opinion: are they the more difficult to create, or the (other) beings We have created? Them have We created out of a sticky clay!

بل عجبت ويسخرون
Truly dost thou marvel, while they ridicule,

وإذا ذكروا لا يذكرون
And, when they are admonished, pay no heed,-

وإذا رأوا آية يستسخرون
And, when they see a Sign, turn it to mockery,

وقالوا إن هذا إلا سحر مبين
And say, "This is nothing but evident sorcery!

أإذا متنا وكنا ترابا وعظاما أإنا لمبعوثون
"What! when we die, and become dust and bones, shall we (then) be raised up (again)

أوآباؤنا الأولون
"And also our fathers of old?"

قل نعم وأنتم داخرون
Say thou: "Yea, and ye shall then be humiliated (on account of your evil)."

فإنما هي زجرة واحدة فإذا هم ينظرون
Then it will be a single (compelling) cry; and behold, they will begin to see!

وقالوا يا ويلنا هذا يوم الدين
They will say, "Ah! Woe to us! This is the Day of Judgment!"

هذا يوم الفصل الذي كنتم به تكذبون
(A voice will say,) "This is the Day of Sorting Out, whose truth ye (once) denied!"

احشروا الذين ظلموا وأزواجهم وما كانوا يعبدون
"Bring ye up", it shall be said, "The wrong-doers and their wives, and the things they worshipped-

من دون الله فاهدوهم إلى صراط الجحيم
"Besides Allah, and lead them to the Way to the (Fierce) Fire!

وقفوهم إنهم مسئولون
"But stop them, for they must be asked:

ما لكم لا تناصرون
"'What is the matter with you that ye help not each other?'"

بل هم اليوم مستسلمون
Nay, but that day they shall submit (to Judgment);

وأقبل بعضهم على بعض يتساءلون
And they will turn to one another, and question one another.

قالوا إنكم كنتم تأتوننا عن اليمين
They will say: "It was ye who used to come to us from the right hand (of power and authority)!"

قالوا بل لم تكونوا مؤمنين
They will reply: "Nay, ye yourselves had no Faith!

وما كان لنا عليكم من سلطان بل كنتم قوما طاغين
"Nor had we any authority over you. Nay, it was ye who were a people in obstinate rebellion!

فحق علينا قول ربنا إنا لذائقون
"So now has been proved true, against us, the word of our Lord that we shall indeed (have to) taste (the punishment of our sins).

فأغويناكم إنا كنا غاوين
"We led you astray: for truly we were ourselves astray."

فإنهم يومئذ في العذاب مشتركون
Truly, that Day, they will (all) share in the Penalty.

إنا كذلك نفعل بالمجرمين
Verily that is how We shall deal with Sinners.

إنهم كانوا إذا قيل لهم لا إله إلا الله يستكبرون
For they, when they were told that there is no god except Allah, would puff themselves up with Pride,

ويقولون أئنا لتاركو آلهتنا لشاعر مجنون
And say: "What! shall we give up our gods for the sake of a Poet possessed?"

بل جاء بالحق وصدق المرسلين
Nay! he has come with the (very) Truth, and he confirms (the Message of) the messengers (before him).

إنكم لذائقو العذاب الأليم
Ye shall indeed taste of the Grievous Penalty;-

وما تجزون إلا ما كنتم تعملون
But it will be no more than the retribution of (the Evil) that ye have wrought;-

إلا عباد الله المخلصين
But the sincere (and devoted) Servants of Allah,-

أولئك لهم رزق معلوم
For them is a Sustenance determined,

فواكه وهم مكرمون
Fruits (Delights); and they (shall enjoy) honour and dignity,

في جنات النعيم
In Gardens of Felicity,

على سرر متقابلين
Facing each other on Thrones (of Dignity):

يطاف عليهم بكأس من معين
Round will be passed to them a Cup from a clear-flowing fountain,

بيضاء لذة للشاربين
Crystal-white, of a taste delicious to those who drink (thereof),

لا فيها غول ولا هم عنها ينزفون
Free from headiness; nor will they suffer intoxication therefrom.

وعندهم قاصرات الطرف عين
And besides them will be chaste women, restraining their glances, with big eyes (of wonder and beauty).

كأنهن بيض مكنون
As if they were (delicate) eggs closely guarded.

فأقبل بعضهم على بعض يتساءلون
Then they will turn to one another and question one another.

قال قائل منهم إني كان لي قرين
One of them will start the talk and say: "I had an intimate companion (on the earth),

يقول أإنك لمن المصدقين
"Who used to say, 'what! art thou amongst those who bear witness to the Truth (of the Message)?

أإذا متنا وكنا ترابا وعظاما أإنا لمدينون
"'When we die and become dust and bones, shall we indeed receive rewards and punishments?'"

قال هل أنتم مطلعون
(A voice) said: "Would ye like to look down?"

فاطلع فرآه في سواء الجحيم
He looked down and saw him in the midst of the Fire.

قال تالله إن كدت لتردين
He said: "By Allah! thou wast little short of bringing me to perdition!

ولولا نعمة ربي لكنت من المحضرين
"Had it not been for the Grace of my Lord, I should certainly have been among those brought (there)!

أفما نحن بميتين
"Is it (the case) that we shall not die,

إلا موتتنا الأولى وما نحن بمعذبين
"Except our first death, and that we shall not be punished?"

إن هذا لهو الفوز العظيم
Verily this is the supreme achievement!

لمثل هذا فليعمل العاملون
For the like of this let all strive, who wish to strive.

أذلك خير نزلا أم شجرة الزقوم
Is that the better entertainment or the Tree of Zaqqum?

إنا جعلناها فتنة للظالمين
For We have truly made it (as) a trial for the wrong-doers.

إنها شجرة تخرج في أصل الجحيم
For it is a tree that springs out of the bottom of Hell-Fire:

طلعها كأنه رءوس الشياطين
The shoots of its fruit-stalks are like the heads of devils:

فإنهم لآكلون منها فمالئون منها البطون
Truly they will eat thereof and fill their bellies therewith.

ثم إن لهم عليها لشوبا من حميم
Then on top of that they will be given a mixture made of boiling water.

ثم إن مرجعهم لإلى الجحيم
Then shall their return be to the (Blazing) Fire.

إنهم ألفوا آباءهم ضالين
Truly they found their fathers on the wrong Path;

فهم على آثارهم يهرعون
So they (too) were rushed down on their footsteps!

ولقد ضل قبلهم أكثر الأولين
And truly before them, many of the ancients went astray;-

ولقد أرسلنا فيهم منذرين
But We sent aforetime, among them, (messengers) to admonish them;-

فانظر كيف كان عاقبة المنذرين
Then see what was the end of those who were admonished (but heeded not),-

إلا عباد الله المخلصين
Except the sincere (and devoted) Servants of Allah.

ولقد نادانا نوح فلنعم المجيبون
(In the days of old), Noah cried to Us, and We are the best to hear prayer.

ونجيناه وأهله من الكرب العظيم
And We delivered him and his people from the Great Calamity,

وجعلنا ذريته هم الباقين
And made his progeny to endure (on this earth);

وتركنا عليه في الآخرين
And We left (this blessing) for him among generations to come in later times:

سلام على نوح في العالمين
"Peace and salutation to Noah among the nations!"

إنا كذلك نجزي المحسنين
Thus indeed do we reward those who do right.

إنه من عبادنا المؤمنين
For he was one of our believing Servants.

ثم أغرقنا الآخرين
Then the rest we overwhelmed in the Flood.

وإن من شيعته لإبراهيم
Verily among those who followed his Way was Abraham.

إذ جاء ربه بقلب سليم
Behold! he approached his Lord with a sound heart.

إذ قال لأبيه وقومه ماذا تعبدون
Behold! he said to his father and to his people, "What is that which ye worship?

أئفكا آلهة دون الله تريدون
"Is it a falsehood- gods other than Allah- that ye desire?

فما ظنكم برب العالمين
"Then what is your idea about the Lord of the worlds?"

فنظر نظرة في النجوم
Then did he cast a glance at the Stars.

فقال إني سقيم
And he said, "I am indeed sick (at heart)!"

فتولوا عنه مدبرين
So they turned away from him, and departed.

فراغ إلى آلهتهم فقال ألا تأكلون
Then did he turn to their gods and said, "will ye not eat (of the offerings before you)?...

ما لكم لا تنطقون
"What is the matter with you that ye speak not (intelligently)?"

فراغ عليهم ضربا باليمين
Then did he turn upon them, striking (them) with the right hand.

فأقبلوا إليه يزفون
Then came (the worshippers) with hurried steps, and faced (him).

قال أتعبدون ما تنحتون
He said: "Worship ye that which ye have (yourselves) carved?

والله خلقكم وما تعملون
"But Allah has created you and your handwork!"

قالوا ابنوا له بنيانا فألقوه في الجحيم
They said, "Build him a furnace, and throw him into the blazing fire!"

فأرادوا به كيدا فجعلناهم الأسفلين
(This failing), they then sought a stratagem against him, but We made them the ones most humiliated!

وقال إني ذاهب إلى ربي سيهدين
He said: "I will go to my Lord! He will surely guide me!

رب هب لي من الصالحين
"O my Lord! Grant me a righteous (son)!"

فبشرناه بغلام حليم
So We gave him the good news of a boy ready to suffer and forbear.

فلما بلغ معه السعي قال يا بني إني أرى في المنام أني أذبحك فانظر ماذا ترى قال يا أبت افعل ما تؤمر ستجدني إن شاء الله من الصابرين
Then, when (the son) reached (the age of) (serious) work with him, he said: "O my son! I see in vision that I offer thee in sacrifice: Now see what is thy view!" (The son) said: "O my father! Do as thou art commanded: thou will find me, if Allah so wills one practising Patience and Constancy!"

فلما أسلما وتله للجبين
So when they had both submitted their wills (to Allah), and he had laid him prostrate on his forehead (for sacrifice),

وناديناه أن يا إبراهيم
We called out to him "O Abraham!

قد صدقت الرؤيا إنا كذلك نجزي المحسنين
"Thou hast already fulfilled the vision!" - thus indeed do We reward those who do right.

إن هذا لهو البلاء المبين
For this was obviously a trial-

وفديناه بذبح عظيم
And We ransomed him with a momentous sacrifice:

وتركنا عليه في الآخرين
And We left (this blessing) for him among generations (to come) in later times:

سلام على إبراهيم
"Peace and salutation to Abraham!"

كذلك نجزي المحسنين
Thus indeed do We reward those who do right.

إنه من عبادنا المؤمنين
For he was one of our believing Servants.

وبشرناه بإسحاق نبيا من الصالحين
And We gave him the good news of Isaac - a prophet,- one of the Righteous.

وباركنا عليه وعلى إسحاق ومن ذريتهما محسن وظالم لنفسه مبين
We blessed him and Isaac: but of their progeny are (some) that do right, and (some) that obviously do wrong, to their own souls.

ولقد مننا على موسى وهارون
Again (of old) We bestowed Our favour on Moses and Aaron,

ونجيناهما وقومهما من الكرب العظيم
And We delivered them and their people from (their) Great Calamity;

ونصرناهم فكانوا هم الغالبين
And We helped them, so they overcame (their troubles);

وآتيناهما الكتاب المستبين
And We gave them the Book which helps to make things clear;

وهديناهما الصراط المستقيم
And We guided them to the Straight Way.

وتركنا عليهما في الآخرين
And We left (this blessing) for them among generations (to come) in later times:

سلام على موسى وهارون
"Peace and salutation to Moses and Aaron!"

إنا كذلك نجزي المحسنين
Thus indeed do We reward those who do right.

إنهما من عبادنا المؤمنين
For they were two of our believing Servants.

وإن إلياس لمن المرسلين
So also was Elias among those sent (by Us).

إذ قال لقومه ألا تتقون
Behold, he said to his people, "Will ye not fear (Allah)?

أتدعون بعلا وتذرون أحسن الخالقين
"Will ye call upon Baal and forsake the Best of Creators,-

الله ربكم ورب آبائكم الأولين
"Allah, your Lord and Cherisher and the Lord and Cherisher of your fathers of old?"

فكذبوه فإنهم لمحضرون
But they rejected him, and they will certainly be called up (for punishment),-

إلا عباد الله المخلصين
Except the sincere and devoted Servants of Allah (among them).

وتركنا عليه في الآخرين
And We left (this blessing) for him among generations (to come) in later times:

سلام على إل ياسين
"Peace and salutation to such as Elias!"

إنا كذلك نجزي المحسنين
Thus indeed do We reward those who do right.

إنه من عبادنا المؤمنين
For he was one of our believing Servants.

وإن لوطا لمن المرسلين
So also was Lut among those sent (by Us).

إذ نجيناه وأهله أجمعين
Behold, We delivered him and his adherents, all

إلا عجوزا في الغابرين
Except an old woman who was among those who lagged behind:

ثم دمرنا الآخرين
Then We destroyed the rest.

وإنكم لتمرون عليهم مصبحين
Verily, ye pass by their (sites), by day-

وبالليل أفلا تعقلون
And by night: will ye not understand?

وإن يونس لمن المرسلين
So also was Jonah among those sent (by Us).

إذ أبق إلى الفلك المشحون
When he ran away (like a slave from captivity) to the ship (fully) laden,

فساهم فكان من المدحضين
He (agreed to) cast lots, and he was condemned:

فالتقمه الحوت وهو مليم
Then the big Fish did swallow him, and he had done acts worthy of blame.

فلولا أنه كان من المسبحين
Had it not been that he (repented and) glorified Allah,

للبث في بطنه إلى يوم يبعثون
He would certainly have remained inside the Fish till the Day of Resurrection.

فنبذناه بالعراء وهو سقيم
But We cast him forth on the naked shore in a state of sickness,

وأنبتنا عليه شجرة من يقطين
And We caused to grow, over him, a spreading plant of the gourd kind.

وأرسلناه إلى مائة ألف أو يزيدون
And We sent him (on a mission) to a hundred thousand (men) or more.

فآمنوا فمتعناهم إلى حين
And they believed; so We permitted them to enjoy (their life) for a while.

فاستفتهم ألربك البنات ولهم البنون
Now ask them their opinion: Is it that thy Lord has (only) daughters, and they have sons?-

أم خلقنا الملائكة إناثا وهم شاهدون
Or that We created the angels female, and they are witnesses (thereto)?

ألا إنهم من إفكهم ليقولون
Is it not that they say, from their own invention,

ولد الله وإنهم لكاذبون
"Allah has begotten children"? but they are liars!

أصطفى البنات على البنين
Did He (then) choose daughters rather than sons?

ما لكم كيف تحكمون
What is the matter with you? How judge ye?

أفلا تذكرون
Will ye not then receive admonition?

أم لكم سلطان مبين
Or have ye an authority manifest?

فأتوا بكتابكم إن كنتم صادقين
Then bring ye your Book (of authority) if ye be truthful!

وجعلوا بينه وبين الجنة نسبا ولقد علمت الجنة إنهم لمحضرون
And they have invented a blood-relationship between Him and the Jinns: but the Jinns know (quite well) that they have indeed to appear (before his Judgment-Seat)!

سبحان الله عما يصفون
Glory to Allah! (He is free) from the things they ascribe (to Him)!

إلا عباد الله المخلصين
Not (so do) the Servants of Allah, sincere and devoted.

فإنكم وما تعبدون
For, verily, neither ye nor those ye worship-

ما أنتم عليه بفاتنين
Can lead (any) into temptation concerning Allah,

إلا من هو صال الجحيم
Except such as are (themselves) going to the blazing Fire!

وما منا إلا له مقام معلوم
(Those ranged in ranks say): "Not one of us but has a place appointed;

وإنا لنحن الصافون
"And we are verily ranged in ranks (for service);

وإنا لنحن المسبحون
"And we are verily those who declare (Allah's) glory!"

وإن كانوا ليقولون
And there were those who said,

لو أن عندنا ذكرا من الأولين
"If only we had had before us a Message from those of old,

لكنا عباد الله المخلصين
"We should certainly have been Servants of Allah, sincere (and devoted)!"

فكفروا به فسوف يعلمون
But (now that the Qur'an has come), they reject it: But soon will they know!

ولقد سبقت كلمتنا لعبادنا المرسلين
Already has Our Word been passed before (this) to our Servants sent (by Us),

إنهم لهم المنصورون
That they would certainly be assisted,

وإن جندنا لهم الغالبون
And that Our forces,- they surely must conquer.

فتول عنهم حتى حين
So turn thou away from them for a little while,

وأبصرهم فسوف يبصرون
And watch them (how they fare), and they soon shall see (how thou farest)!

أفبعذابنا يستعجلون
Do they wish (indeed) to hurry on our Punishment?

فإذا نزل بساحتهم فساء صباح المنذرين
But when it descends into the open space before them, evil will be the morning for those who were warned (and heeded not)!

وتول عنهم حتى حين
So turn thou away from them for a little while,

وأبصر فسوف يبصرون
And watch (how they fare) and they soon shall see (how thou farest)!

سبحان ربك رب العزة عما يصفون
Glory to thy Lord, the Lord of Honour and Power! (He is free) from what they ascribe (to Him)!

وسلام على المرسلين
And Peace on the messengers!

والحمد لله رب العالمين
And Praise to Allah, the Lord and Cherisher of the Worlds.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم ص والقرآن ذي الذكر
Sad: By the Qur'an, Full of Admonition: (This is the Truth).

بل الذين كفروا في عزة وشقاق
But the Unbelievers (are steeped) in self-glory and Separatism.

كم أهلكنا من قبلهم من قرن فنادوا ولات حين مناص
How many generations before them did We destroy? In the end they cried (for mercy)- when there was no longer time for being saved!

وعجبوا أن جاءهم منذر منهم وقال الكافرون هذا ساحر كذاب
So they wonder that a Warner has come to them from among themselves! and the Unbelievers say, "This is a sorcerer telling lies!

أجعل الآلهة إلها واحدا إن هذا لشيء عجاب
"Has he made the gods (all) into one Allah? Truly this is a wonderful thing!"

وانطلق الملأ منهم أن امشوا واصبروا على آلهتكم إن هذا لشيء يراد
And the leader among them go away (impatiently), (saying), "Walk ye away, and remain constant to your gods! For this is truly a thing designed (against you)!

ما سمعنا بهذا في الملة الآخرة إن هذا إلا اختلاق
"We never heard (the like) of this among the people of these latter days: this is nothing but a made-up tale!"

أأنزل عليه الذكر من بيننا بل هم في شك من ذكري بل لما يذوقوا عذاب
"What! has the Message been sent to him - (Of all persons) among us?"... but they are in doubt concerning My (Own) Message! Nay, they have not yet tasted My Punishment!

أم عندهم خزائن رحمة ربك العزيز الوهاب
Or have they the treasures of the mercy of thy Lord,- the Exalted in Power, the Grantor of Bounties without measure?

أم لهم ملك السماوات والأرض وما بينهما فليرتقوا في الأسباب
Or have they the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all between? If so, let them mount up with the ropes and means (to reach that end)!

جند ما هنالك مهزوم من الأحزاب
But there - will be put to flight even a host of confederates.

كذبت قبلهم قوم نوح وعاد وفرعون ذو الأوتاد
Before them (were many who) rejected messengers,- the people of Noah, and 'Ad, and Pharaoh, the Lord of Stakes,

وثمود وقوم لوط وأصحاب الأيكة أولئك الأحزاب
And Thamud, and the people of Lut, and the Companions of the Wood; - such were the Confederates.

إن كل إلا كذب الرسل فحق عقاب
Not one (of them) but rejected the messengers, but My punishment came justly and inevitably (on them).

وما ينظر هؤلاء إلا صيحة واحدة ما لها من فواق
These (today) only wait for a single mighty Blast, which (when it comes) will brook no delay.

وقالوا ربنا عجل لنا قطنا قبل يوم الحساب
They say: "Our Lord! hasten to us our sentence (even) before the Day of Account!"

اصبر على ما يقولون واذكر عبدنا داوود ذا الأيد إنه أواب
Have patience at what they say, and remember our servant David, the man of strength: for he ever turned (to Allah).

إنا سخرنا الجبال معه يسبحن بالعشي والإشراق
It was We that made the hills declare, in unison with him, Our Praises, at eventide and at break of day,

والطير محشورة كل له أواب
And the birds gathered (in assemblies): all with him did turn (to Allah).

وشددنا ملكه وآتيناه الحكمة وفصل الخطاب
We strengthened his kingdom, and gave him wisdom and sound judgment in speech and decision.

وهل أتاك نبأ الخصم إذ تسوروا المحراب
Has the Story of the Disputants reached thee? Behold, they climbed over the wall of the private chamber;

إذ دخلوا على داوود ففزع منهم قالوا لا تخف خصمان بغى بعضنا على بعض فاحكم بيننا بالحق ولا تشطط واهدنا إلى سواء الصراط
When they entered the presence of David, and he was terrified of them, they said: "Fear not: we are two disputants, one of whom has wronged the other: Decide now between us with truth, and treat us not with injustice, but guide us to the even Path..

إن هذا أخي له تسع وتسعون نعجة ولي نعجة واحدة فقال أكفلنيها وعزني في الخطاب
"This man is my brother: He has nine and ninety ewes, and I have (but) one: Yet he says, 'commit her to my care,' and is (moreover) harsh to me in speech."

قال لقد ظلمك بسؤال نعجتك إلى نعاجه وإن كثيرا من الخلطاء ليبغي بعضهم على بعض إلا الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات وقليل ما هم وظن داوود أنما فتناه فاستغفر ربه وخر راكعا وأناب
(David) said: "He has undoubtedly wronged thee in demanding thy (single) ewe to be added to his (flock of) ewes: truly many are the partners (in business) who wrong each other: Not so do those who believe and work deeds of righteousness, and how few are they?"... and David gathered that We had tried him: he asked forgiveness of his Lord, fell down, bowing (in prostration), and turned (to Allah in repentance).

فغفرنا له ذلك وإن له عندنا لزلفى وحسن مآب
So We forgave him this (lapse): he enjoyed, indeed, a Near Approach to Us, and a beautiful place of (Final) Return.

يا داوود إنا جعلناك خليفة في الأرض فاحكم بين الناس بالحق ولا تتبع الهوى فيضلك عن سبيل الله إن الذين يضلون عن سبيل الله لهم عذاب شديد بما نسوا يوم الحساب
O David! We did indeed make thee a vicegerent on earth: so judge thou between men in truth (and justice): Nor follow thou the lusts (of thy heart), for they will mislead thee from the Path of Allah: for those who wander astray from the Path of Allah, is a Penalty Grievous, for that they forget the Day of Account.

وما خلقنا السماء والأرض وما بينهما باطلا ذلك ظن الذين كفروا فويل للذين كفروا من النار
Not without purpose did We create heaven and earth and all between! that were the thought of Unbelievers! but woe to the Unbelievers because of the Fire (of Hell)!

أم نجعل الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات كالمفسدين في الأرض أم نجعل المتقين كالفجار
Shall We treat those who believe and work deeds of righteousness, the same as those who do mischief on earth? Shall We treat those who guard against evil, the same as those who turn aside from the right?

كتاب أنزلناه إليك مبارك ليدبروا آياته وليتذكر أولو الألباب
(Here is) a Book which We have sent down unto thee, full of blessings, that they may mediate on its Signs, and that men of understanding may receive admonition.

ووهبنا لداوود سليمان نعم العبد إنه أواب
To David We gave Solomon (for a son),- How excellent in Our service! Ever did he turn (to Us)!

إذ عرض عليه بالعشي الصافنات الجياد
Behold, there were brought before him, at eventide coursers of the highest breeding, and swift of foot;

فقال إني أحببت حب الخير عن ذكر ربي حتى توارت بالحجاب
And he said, "Truly do I love the love of good, with a view to the glory of my Lord,"- until (the sun) was hidden in the veil (of night):

ردوها علي فطفق مسحا بالسوق والأعناق
"Bring them back to me." then began he to pass his hand over (their) legs and their necks.

ولقد فتنا سليمان وألقينا على كرسيه جسدا ثم أناب
And We did try Solomon: We placed on his throne a body (without life); but he did turn (to Us in true devotion):

قال رب اغفر لي وهب لي ملكا لا ينبغي لأحد من بعدي إنك أنت الوهاب
He said, "O my Lord! Forgive me, and grant me a kingdom which, (it may be), suits not another after me: for Thou art the Grantor of Bounties (without measure).

فسخرنا له الريح تجري بأمره رخاء حيث أصاب
Then We subjected the wind to his power, to flow gently to his order, Whithersoever he willed,-

والشياطين كل بناء وغواص
As also the evil ones, (including) every kind of builder and diver,-

وآخرين مقرنين في الأصفاد
As also others bound together in fetters.

هذا عطاؤنا فامنن أو أمسك بغير حساب
"Such are Our Bounties: whether thou bestow them (on others) or withhold them, no account will be asked."

وإن له عندنا لزلفى وحسن مآب
And he enjoyed, indeed, a Near Approach to Us, and a beautiful Place of (Final) Return.

واذكر عبدنا أيوب إذ نادى ربه أني مسني الشيطان بنصب وعذاب
Commemorate Our Servant Job. Behold he cried to his Lord: "The Evil One has afflicted me with distress and suffering!"

اركض برجلك هذا مغتسل بارد وشراب
(The command was given:) "Strike with thy foot: here is (water) wherein to wash, cool and refreshing, and (water) to drink."

ووهبنا له أهله ومثلهم معهم رحمة منا وذكرى لأولي الألباب
And We gave him (back) his people, and doubled their number,- as a Grace from Ourselves, and a thing for commemoration, for all who have Understanding.

وخذ بيدك ضغثا فاضرب به ولا تحنث إنا وجدناه صابرا نعم العبد إنه أواب
"And take in thy hand a little grass, and strike therewith: and break not (thy oath)." Truly We found him full of patience and constancy. How excellent in Our service! ever did he turn (to Us)!

واذكر عبادنا إبراهيم وإسحاق ويعقوب أولي الأيدي والأبصار
And commemorate Our Servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, possessors of Power and Vision.

إنا أخلصناهم بخالصة ذكرى الدار
Verily We did choose them for a special (purpose)- proclaiming the Message of the Hereafter.

وإنهم عندنا لمن المصطفين الأخيار
They were, in Our sight, truly, of the company of the Elect and the Good.

واذكر إسماعيل واليسع وذا الكفل وكل من الأخيار
And commemorate Isma'il, Elisha, and Zul-Kifl: Each of them was of the Company of the Good.

هذا ذكر وإن للمتقين لحسن مآب
This is a Message (of admonition): and verily, for the righteous, is a beautiful Place of (Final) Return,-

جنات عدن مفتحة لهم الأبواب
Gardens of Eternity, whose doors will (ever) be open to them;

متكئين فيها يدعون فيها بفاكهة كثيرة وشراب
Therein will they recline (at ease): Therein can they call (at pleasure) for fruit in abundance, and (delicious) drink;

وعندهم قاصرات الطرف أتراب
And beside them will be chaste women restraining their glances, (companions) of equal age.

هذا ما توعدون ليوم الحساب
Such is the Promise made, to you for the Day of Account!

إن هذا لرزقنا ما له من نفاد
Truly such will be Our Bounty (to you); it will never fail;-

هذا وإن للطاغين لشر مآب
Yea, such! but - for the wrong-doers will be an evil place of (Final) Return!-

جهنم يصلونها فبئس المهاد
Hell!- they will burn therein, - an evil bed (indeed, to lie on)!-

هذا فليذوقوه حميم وغساق
Yea, such! - then shall they taste it,- a boiling fluid, and a fluid dark, murky, intensely cold!-

وآخر من شكله أزواج
And other Penalties of a similar kind, to match them!

هذا فوج مقتحم معكم لا مرحبا بهم إنهم صالو النار
Here is a troop rushing headlong with you! No welcome for them! truly, they shall burn in the Fire!

قالوا بل أنتم لا مرحبا بكم أنتم قدمتموه لنا فبئس القرار
(The followers shall cry to the misleaders:) "Nay, ye (too)! No welcome for you! It is ye who have brought this upon us! Now evil is (this) place to stay in!"

قالوا ربنا من قدم لنا هذا فزده عذابا ضعفا في النار
They will say: "Our Lord! whoever brought this upon us,- Add to him a double Penalty in the Fire!"

وقالوا ما لنا لا نرى رجالا كنا نعدهم من الأشرار
And they will say: "What has happened to us that we see not men whom we used to number among the bad ones?

أتخذناهم سخريا أم زاغت عنهم الأبصار
"Did we treat them (as such) in ridicule, or have (our) eyes failed to perceive them?"

إن ذلك لحق تخاصم أهل النار
Truly that is just and fitting,- the mutual recriminations of the People of the Fire!

قل إنما أنا منذر وما من إله إلا الله الواحد القهار
Say: "Truly am I a Warner: no god is there but the one Allah, Supreme and Irresistible,-

رب السماوات والأرض وما بينهما العزيز الغفار
"The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and all between,- Exalted in Might, able to enforce His Will, forgiving again and again."

قل هو نبأ عظيم
Say: "That is a Message Supreme (above all),-

أنتم عنه معرضون
"From which ye do turn away!

ما كان لي من علم بالملإ الأعلى إذ يختصمون
"No knowledge have I of the Chiefs on high, when they discuss (matters) among themselves.

إن يوحى إلي إلا أنما أنا نذير مبين
'Only this has been revealed to me: that I am to give warning plainly and publicly."

إذ قال ربك للملائكة إني خالق بشرا من طين
Behold, thy Lord said to the angels: "I am about to create man from clay:

فإذا سويته ونفخت فيه من روحي فقعوا له ساجدين
"When I have fashioned him (in due proportion) and breathed into him of My spirit, fall ye down in obeisance unto him."

فسجد الملائكة كلهم أجمعون
So the angels prostrated themselves, all of them together:

إلا إبليس استكبر وكان من الكافرين
Not so Iblis: he was haughty, and became one of those who reject Faith.

قال يا إبليس ما منعك أن تسجد لما خلقت بيدي أستكبرت أم كنت من العالين
(Allah) said: "O Iblis! What prevents thee from prostrating thyself to one whom I have created with my hands? Art thou haughty? Or art thou one of the high (and mighty) ones?"

قال أنا خير منه خلقتني من نار وخلقته من طين
(Iblis) said: "I am better than he: thou createdst me from fire, and him thou createdst from clay."

قال فاخرج منها فإنك رجيم
(Allah) said: "Then get thee out from here: for thou art rejected, accursed.

وإن عليك لعنتي إلى يوم الدين
"And My curse shall be on thee till the Day of Judgment."

قال رب فأنظرني إلى يوم يبعثون
(Iblis) said: "O my Lord! Give me then respite till the Day the (dead) are raised."

قال فإنك من المنظرين
(Allah) said: "Respite then is granted thee-

إلى يوم الوقت المعلوم
"Till the Day of the Time Appointed."

قال فبعزتك لأغوينهم أجمعين
(Iblis) said: "Then, by Thy power, I will put them all in the wrong,-

إلا عبادك منهم المخلصين
"Except Thy Servants amongst them, sincere and purified (by Thy Grace)."

قال فالحق والحق أقول
(Allah) said: "Then it is just and fitting- and I say what is just and fitting-

لأملأن جهنم منك وممن تبعك منهم أجمعين
"That I will certainly fill Hell with thee and those that follow thee,- every one."

قل ما أسألكم عليه من أجر وما أنا من المتكلفين
Say: "No reward do I ask of you for this (Qur'an), nor am I a pretender.

إن هو إلا ذكر للعالمين
"This is no less than a Message to (all) the Worlds.

ولتعلمن نبأه بعد حين
"And ye shall certainly know the truth of it (all) after a while."

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم تنزيل الكتاب من الله العزيز الحكيم
The revelation of this Book is from Allah, the Exalted in Power, full of Wisdom.

إنا أنزلنا إليك الكتاب بالحق فاعبد الله مخلصا له الدين
Verily it is We Who have revealed the Book to thee in Truth: so serve Allah, offering Him sincere devotion.

ألا لله الدين الخالص والذين اتخذوا من دونه أولياء ما نعبدهم إلا ليقربونا إلى الله زلفى إن الله يحكم بينهم في ما هم فيه يختلفون إن الله لا يهدي من هو كاذب كفار
Is it not to Allah that sincere devotion is due? But those who take for protectors other than Allah (say): "We only serve them in order that they may bring us nearer to Allah." Truly Allah will judge between them in that wherein they differ. But Allah guides not such as are false and ungrateful.

لو أراد الله أن يتخذ ولدا لاصطفى مما يخلق ما يشاء سبحانه هو الله الواحد القهار
Had Allah wished to take to Himself a son, He could have chosen whom He pleased out of those whom He doth create: but Glory be to Him! (He is above such things.) He is Allah, the One, the Irresistible.

خلق السماوات والأرض بالحق يكور الليل على النهار ويكور النهار على الليل وسخر الشمس والقمر كل يجري لأجل مسمى ألا هو العزيز الغفار
He created the heavens and the earth in true (proportions): He makes the Night overlap the Day, and the Day overlap the Night: He has subjected the sun and the moon (to His law): Each one follows a course for a time appointed. Is not He the Exalted in Power - He Who forgives again and again?

خلقكم من نفس واحدة ثم جعل منها زوجها وأنزل لكم من الأنعام ثمانية أزواج يخلقكم في بطون أمهاتكم خلقا من بعد خلق في ظلمات ثلاث ذلكم الله ربكم له الملك لا إله إلا هو فأنى تصرفون
He created you (all) from a single person: then created, of like nature, his mate; and he sent down for you eight head of cattle in pairs: He makes you, in the wombs of your mothers, in stages, one after another, in three veils of darkness. such is Allah, your Lord and Cherisher: to Him belongs (all) dominion. There is no god but He: then how are ye turned away (from your true Centre)?

إن تكفروا فإن الله غني عنكم ولا يرضى لعباده الكفر وإن تشكروا يرضه لكم ولا تزر وازرة وزر أخرى ثم إلى ربكم مرجعكم فينبئكم بما كنتم تعملون إنه عليم بذات الصدور
If ye reject (Allah), Truly Allah hath no need of you; but He liketh not ingratitude from His servants: if ye are grateful, He is pleased with you. No bearer of burdens can bear the burden of another. In the end, to your Lord is your Return, when He will tell you the truth of all that ye did (in this life). for He knoweth well all that is in (men's) hearts.

وإذا مس الإنسان ضر دعا ربه منيبا إليه ثم إذا خوله نعمة منه نسي ما كان يدعو إليه من قبل وجعل لله أندادا ليضل عن سبيله قل تمتع بكفرك قليلا إنك من أصحاب النار
When some trouble toucheth man, he crieth unto his Lord, turning to Him in repentance: but when He bestoweth a favour upon him as from Himself, (man) doth forget what he cried and prayed for before, and he doth set up rivals unto Allah, thus misleading others from Allah's Path. Say, "Enjoy thy blasphemy for a little while: verily thou art (one) of the Companions of the Fire!"

أمن هو قانت آناء الليل ساجدا وقائما يحذر الآخرة ويرجو رحمة ربه قل هل يستوي الذين يعلمون والذين لا يعلمون إنما يتذكر أولو الألباب
Is one who worships devoutly during the hour of the night prostrating himself or standing (in adoration), who takes heed of the Hereafter, and who places his hope in the Mercy of his Lord - (like one who does not)? Say: "Are those equal, those who know and those who do not know? It is those who are endued with understanding that receive admonition.

قل يا عباد الذين آمنوا اتقوا ربكم للذين أحسنوا في هذه الدنيا حسنة وأرض الله واسعة إنما يوفى الصابرون أجرهم بغير حساب
Say: "O ye my servants who believe! Fear your Lord, good is (the reward) for those who do good in this world. Spacious is Allah's earth! those who patiently persevere will truly receive a reward without measure!"

قل إني أمرت أن أعبد الله مخلصا له الدين
Say: "Verily, I am commanded to serve Allah with sincere devotion;

وأمرت لأن أكون أول المسلمين
"And I am commanded to be the first of those who bow to Allah in Islam."

قل إني أخاف إن عصيت ربي عذاب يوم عظيم
Say: "I would, if I disobeyed my Lord, indeed have fear of the Penalty of a Mighty Day."

قل الله أعبد مخلصا له ديني
Say: "It is Allah I serve, with my sincere (and exclusive) devotion:

فاعبدوا ما شئتم من دونه قل إن الخاسرين الذين خسروا أنفسهم وأهليهم يوم القيامة ألا ذلك هو الخسران المبين
"Serve ye what ye will besides him." Say: "Truly, those in loss are those who lose their own souls and their People on the Day of Judgment: Ah! that is indeed the (real and) evident Loss!

لهم من فوقهم ظلل من النار ومن تحتهم ظلل ذلك يخوف الله به عباده يا عباد فاتقون
They shall have Layers of Fire above them, and Layers (of Fire) below them: with this doth Allah warn off his servants: "O My Servants! then fear ye Me!"

والذين اجتنبوا الطاغوت أن يعبدوها وأنابوا إلى الله لهم البشرى فبشر عباد
Those who eschew Evil,- and fall not into its worship,- and turn to Allah (in repentance),- for them is Good News: so announce the Good News to My Servants,-

الذين يستمعون القول فيتبعون أحسنه أولئك الذين هداهم الله وأولئك هم أولو الألباب
Those who listen to the Word, and follow the best (meaning) in it: those are the ones whom Allah has guided, and those are the ones endued with understanding.

أفمن حق عليه كلمة العذاب أفأنت تنقذ من في النار
Is, then, one against whom the decree of Punishment is justly due (equal to one who eschews Evil)? Wouldst thou, then, deliver one (who is) in the Fire?

لكن الذين اتقوا ربهم لهم غرف من فوقها غرف مبنية تجري من تحتها الأنهار وعد الله لا يخلف الله الميعاد
But it is for those who fear their Lord. That lofty mansions, one above another, have been built: beneath them flow rivers (of delight): (such is) the Promise of Allah: never doth Allah fail in (His) promise.

ألم تر أن الله أنزل من السماء ماء فسلكه ينابيع في الأرض ثم يخرج به زرعا مختلفا ألوانه ثم يهيج فتراه مصفرا ثم يجعله حطاما إن في ذلك لذكرى لأولي الألباب
Seest thou not that Allah sends down rain from the sky, and leads it through springs in the earth? Then He causes to grow, therewith, produce of various colours: then it withers; thou wilt see it grow yellow; then He makes it dry up and crumble away. Truly, in this, is a Message of remembrance to men of understanding.

أفمن شرح الله صدره للإسلام فهو على نور من ربه فويل للقاسية قلوبهم من ذكر الله أولئك في ضلال مبين
Is one whose heart Allah has opened to Islam, so that he has received Enlightenment from Allah, (no better than one hard-hearted)? Woe to those whose hearts are hardened against celebrating the praises of Allah! they are manifestly wandering (in error)!

الله نزل أحسن الحديث كتابا متشابها مثاني تقشعر منه جلود الذين يخشون ربهم ثم تلين جلودهم وقلوبهم إلى ذكر الله ذلك هدى الله يهدي به من يشاء ومن يضلل الله فما له من هاد
Allah has revealed (from time to time) the most beautiful Message in the form of a Book, consistent with itself, (yet) repeating (its teaching in various aspects): the skins of those who fear their Lord tremble thereat; then their skins and their hearts do soften to the celebration of Allah's praises. Such is the guidance of Allah: He guides therewith whom He pleases, but such as Allah leaves to stray, can have none to guide.

أفمن يتقي بوجهه سوء العذاب يوم القيامة وقيل للظالمين ذوقوا ما كنتم تكسبون
Is, then, one who has to fear the brunt of the Penalty on the Day of Judgment (and receive it) on his face, (like one guarded therefrom)? It will be said to the wrong-doers: "Taste ye (the fruits of) what ye earned!"

كذب الذين من قبلهم فأتاهم العذاب من حيث لا يشعرون
Those before them (also) rejected (revelation), and so the Punishment came to them from directions they did not perceive.

فأذاقهم الله الخزي في الحياة الدنيا ولعذاب الآخرة أكبر لو كانوا يعلمون
So Allah gave them a taste of humiliation in the present life, but greater is the punishment of the Hereafter, if they only knew!

ولقد ضربنا للناس في هذا القرآن من كل مثل لعلهم يتذكرون
We have put forth for men, in this Qur'an every kind of Parable, in order that they may receive admonition.

قرآنا عربيا غير ذي عوج لعلهم يتقون
(It is) a Qur'an in Arabic, without any crookedness (therein): in order that they may guard against Evil.

ضرب الله مثلا رجلا فيه شركاء متشاكسون ورجلا سلما لرجل هل يستويان مثلا الحمد لله بل أكثرهم لا يعلمون
Allah puts forth a Parable a man belonging to many partners at variance with each other, and a man belonging entirely to one master: are those two equal in comparison? Praise be to Allah! but most of them have no knowledge.

إنك ميت وإنهم ميتون
Truly thou wilt die (one day), and truly they (too) will die (one day).

ثم إنكم يوم القيامة عند ربكم تختصمون
In the end will ye (all), on the Day of Judgment, settle your disputes in the presence of your Lord.

فمن أظلم ممن كذب على الله وكذب بالصدق إذ جاءه أليس في جهنم مثوى للكافرين
Who, then, doth more wrong than one who utters a lie concerning Allah, and rejects the Truth when it comes to him; is there not in Hell an abode for blasphemers?

والذي جاء بالصدق وصدق به أولئك هم المتقون
And he who brings the Truth and he who confirms (and supports) it - such are the men who do right.

لهم ما يشاءون عند ربهم ذلك جزاء المحسنين
They shall have all that they wish for, in the presence of their Lord: such is the reward of those who do good:

ليكفر الله عنهم أسوأ الذي عملوا ويجزيهم أجرهم بأحسن الذي كانوا يعملون
So that Allah will turn off from them (even) the worst in their deeds and give them their reward according to the best of what they have done.

أليس الله بكاف عبده ويخوفونك بالذين من دونه ومن يضلل الله فما له من هاد
Is not Allah enough for his Servant? But they try to frighten thee with other (gods) besides Him! for such as Allah leaves to stray, there can be no guide.

ومن يهد الله فما له من مضل أليس الله بعزيز ذي انتقام
And such as Allah doth guide there can be none to lead astray. Is not Allah Exalted in Power, (Able to enforce His Will), Lord of Retribution?

ولئن سألتهم من خلق السماوات والأرض ليقولن الله قل أفرأيتم ما تدعون من دون الله إن أرادني الله بضر هل هن كاشفات ضره أو أرادني برحمة هل هن ممسكات رحمته قل حسبي الله عليه يتوكل المتوكلون
If indeed thou ask them who it is that created the heavens and the earth, they would be sure to say, "Allah". Say: "See ye then? the things that ye invoke besides Allah,- can they, if Allah wills some Penalty for me, remove His Penalty?- Or if He wills some Grace for me, can they keep back his Grace?" Say: "Sufficient is Allah for me! In Him trust those who put their trust."

قل يا قوم اعملوا على مكانتكم إني عامل فسوف تعلمون
Say: "O my People! Do whatever ye can: I will do (my part): but soon will ye know-

من يأتيه عذاب يخزيه ويحل عليه عذاب مقيم
"Who it is to whom comes a Penalty of ignominy, and on whom descends a Penalty that abides."

إنا أنزلنا عليك الكتاب للناس بالحق فمن اهتدى فلنفسه ومن ضل فإنما يضل عليها وما أنت عليهم بوكيل
Verily We have revealed the Book to thee in Truth, for (instructing) mankind. He, then, that receives guidance benefits his own soul: but he that strays injures his own soul. Nor art thou set over them to dispose of their affairs.

الله يتوفى الأنفس حين موتها والتي لم تمت في منامها فيمسك التي قضى عليها الموت ويرسل الأخرى إلى أجل مسمى إن في ذلك لآيات لقوم يتفكرون
It is Allah that takes the souls (of men) at death; and those that die not (He takes) during their sleep: those on whom He has passed the decree of death, He keeps back (from returning to life), but the rest He sends (to their bodies) for a term appointed verily in this are Signs for those who reflect.

أم اتخذوا من دون الله شفعاء قل أولو كانوا لا يملكون شيئا ولا يعقلون
What! Do they take for intercessors others besides Allah? Say: "Even if they have no power whatever and no intelligence?"

قل لله الشفاعة جميعا له ملك السماوات والأرض ثم إليه ترجعون
Say: "To Allah belongs exclusively (the right to grant) intercession: to Him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth: In the End, it is to Him that ye shall be brought back."

وإذا ذكر الله وحده اشمأزت قلوب الذين لا يؤمنون بالآخرة وإذا ذكر الذين من دونه إذا هم يستبشرون
When Allah, the One and Only, is mentioned, the hearts of those who believe not in the Hereafter are filled with disgust and horror; but when (gods) other than He are mentioned, behold, they are filled with joy!

قل اللهم فاطر السماوات والأرض عالم الغيب والشهادة أنت تحكم بين عبادك في ما كانوا فيه يختلفون
Say: "O Allah! Creator of the heavens and the earth! Knower of all that is hidden and open! it is Thou that wilt judge between Thy Servants in those matters about which they have differed."

ولو أن للذين ظلموا ما في الأرض جميعا ومثله معه لافتدوا به من سوء العذاب يوم القيامة وبدا لهم من الله ما لم يكونوا يحتسبون
Even if the wrong-doers had all that there is on earth, and as much more, (in vain) would they offer it for ransom from the pain of the Penalty on the Day of Judgment: but something will confront them from Allah, which they could never have counted upon!

وبدا لهم سيئات ما كسبوا وحاق بهم ما كانوا به يستهزئون
For the evils of their Deeds will confront them, and they will be (completely) encircled by that which they used to mock at!

فإذا مس الإنسان ضر دعانا ثم إذا خولناه نعمة منا قال إنما أوتيته على علم بل هي فتنة ولكن أكثرهم لا يعلمون
Now, when trouble touches man, he cries to Us: But when We bestow a favour upon him as from Ourselves, he says, "This has been given to me because of a certain knowledge (I have)!" Nay, but this is but a trial, but most of them understand not!

قد قالها الذين من قبلهم فما أغنى عنهم ما كانوا يكسبون
Thus did the (generations) before them say! But all that they did was of no profit to them.

فأصابهم سيئات ما كسبوا والذين ظلموا من هؤلاء سيصيبهم سيئات ما كسبوا وما هم بمعجزين
Nay, the evil results of their Deeds overtook them. And the wrong-doers of this (generation)- the evil results of their Deeds will soon overtake them (too), and they will never be able to frustrate (Our Plan)!

أولم يعلموا أن الله يبسط الرزق لمن يشاء ويقدر إن في ذلك لآيات لقوم يؤمنون
Know they not that Allah enlarges the provision or restricts it, for any He pleases? Verily, in this are Signs for those who believe!

قل يا عبادي الذين أسرفوا على أنفسهم لا تقنطوا من رحمة الله إن الله يغفر الذنوب جميعا إنه هو الغفور الرحيم
Say: "O my Servants who have transgressed against their souls! Despair not of the Mercy of Allah: for Allah forgives all sins: for He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

وأنيبوا إلى ربكم وأسلموا له من قبل أن يأتيكم العذاب ثم لا تنصرون
"Turn ye to our Lord (in repentance) and bow to His (Will), before the Penalty comes on you: after that ye shall not be helped.

واتبعوا أحسن ما أنزل إليكم من ربكم من قبل أن يأتيكم العذاب بغتة وأنتم لا تشعرون
"And follow the best of (the courses) revealed to you from your Lord, before the Penalty comes on you - of a sudden while ye perceive not!-

أن تقول نفس يا حسرتى على ما فرطت في جنب الله وإن كنت لمن الساخرين
"Lest the soul should (then) say: 'Ah! Woe is me!- In that I neglected (my duty) towards Allah, and was but among those who mocked!'-

أو تقول لو أن الله هداني لكنت من المتقين
"Or (lest) it should say: 'If only Allah had guided me, I should certainly have been among the righteous!'-

أو تقول حين ترى العذاب لو أن لي كرة فأكون من المحسنين
"Or (lest) it should say when it (actually) sees the penalty: 'If only I had another chance, I should certainly be among those who do good!'

بلى قد جاءتك آياتي فكذبت بها واستكبرت وكنت من الكافرين
"(The reply will be:) 'Nay, but there came to thee my Signs, and thou didst reject them: thou wast Haughty, and became one of those who reject faith!'"

ويوم القيامة ترى الذين كذبوا على الله وجوههم مسودة أليس في جهنم مثوى للمتكبرين
On the Day of Judgment wilt thou see those who told lies against Allah;- their faces will be turned black; Is there not in Hell an abode for the Haughty?

وينجي الله الذين اتقوا بمفازتهم لا يمسهم السوء ولا هم يحزنون
But Allah will deliver the righteous to their place of salvation: no evil shall touch them, nor shall they grieve.

الله خالق كل شيء وهو على كل شيء وكيل
Allah is the Creator of all things, and He is the Guardian and Disposer of all affairs.

له مقاليد السماوات والأرض والذين كفروا بآيات الله أولئك هم الخاسرون
To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth: and those who reject the Signs of Allah,- it is they who will be in loss.

قل أفغير الله تأمروني أعبد أيها الجاهلون
Say: "Is it some one other than Allah that ye order me to worship, O ye ignorant ones?"

ولقد أوحي إليك وإلى الذين من قبلك لئن أشركت ليحبطن عملك ولتكونن من الخاسرين
But it has already been revealed to thee,- as it was to those before thee,- "If thou wert to join (gods with Allah), truly fruitless will be thy work (in life), and thou wilt surely be in the ranks of those who lose (all spiritual good)".

بل الله فاعبد وكن من الشاكرين
Nay, but worship Allah, and be of those who give thanks.

وما قدروا الله حق قدره والأرض جميعا قبضته يوم القيامة والسماوات مطويات بيمينه سبحانه وتعالى عما يشركون
No just estimate have they made of Allah, such as is due to Him: On the Day of Judgment the whole of the earth will be but His handful, and the heavens will be rolled up in His right hand: Glory to Him! High is He above the Partners they attribute to Him!

ونفخ في الصور فصعق من في السماوات ومن في الأرض إلا من شاء الله ثم نفخ فيه أخرى فإذا هم قيام ينظرون
The Trumpet will (just) be sounded, when all that are in the heavens and on earth will swoon, except such as it will please Allah (to exempt). Then will a second one be sounded, when, behold, they will be standing and looking on!

وأشرقت الأرض بنور ربها ووضع الكتاب وجيء بالنبيين والشهداء وقضي بينهم بالحق وهم لا يظلمون
And the Earth will shine with the Glory of its Lord: the Record (of Deeds) will be placed (open); the prophets and the witnesses will be brought forward and a just decision pronounced between them; and they will not be wronged (in the least).

ووفيت كل نفس ما عملت وهو أعلم بما يفعلون
And to every soul will be paid in full (the fruit) of its Deeds; and (Allah) knoweth best all that they do.

وسيق الذين كفروا إلى جهنم زمرا حتى إذا جاءوها فتحت أبوابها وقال لهم خزنتها ألم يأتكم رسل منكم يتلون عليكم آيات ربكم وينذرونكم لقاء يومكم هذا قالوا بلى ولكن حقت كلمة العذاب على الكافرين
The Unbelievers will be led to Hell in crowd: until, when they arrive, there, its gates will be opened. And its keepers will say, "Did not messengers come to you from among yourselves, rehearsing to you the Signs of your Lord, and warning you of the Meeting of This Day of yours?" The answer will be: "True: but the Decree of Punishment has been proved true against the Unbelievers!"

قيل ادخلوا أبواب جهنم خالدين فيها فبئس مثوى المتكبرين
(To them) will be said: "Enter ye the gates of Hell, to dwell therein: and evil is (this) Abode of the Arrogant!"

وسيق الذين اتقوا ربهم إلى الجنة زمرا حتى إذا جاءوها وفتحت أبوابها وقال لهم خزنتها سلام عليكم طبتم فادخلوها خالدين
And those who feared their Lord will be led to the Garden in crowds: until behold, they arrive there; its gates will be opened; and its keepers will say: "Peace be upon you! well have ye done! enter ye here, to dwell therein."

وقالوا الحمد لله الذي صدقنا وعده وأورثنا الأرض نتبوأ من الجنة حيث نشاء فنعم أجر العاملين
They will say: "Praise be to Allah, Who has truly fulfilled His Promise to us, and has given us (this) land in heritage: We can dwell in the Garden as we will: how excellent a reward for those who work (righteousness)!"

وترى الملائكة حافين من حول العرش يسبحون بحمد ربهم وقضي بينهم بالحق وقيل الحمد لله رب العالمين
And thou wilt see the angels surrounding the Throne (Divine) on all sides, singing Glory and Praise to their Lord. The Decision between them (at Judgment) will be in (perfect) justice, and the cry (on all sides) will be, "Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds!"

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم حم
Ha Mim

تنزيل الكتاب من الله العزيز العليم
The revelation of this Book is from Allah, Exalted in Power, Full of Knowledge,-

غافر الذنب وقابل التوب شديد العقاب ذي الطول لا إله إلا هو إليه المصير
Who forgiveth sin, accepteth repentance, is strict in punishment, and hath a long reach (in all things). there is no god but He: to Him is the final goal.

ما يجادل في آيات الله إلا الذين كفروا فلا يغررك تقلبهم في البلاد
None can dispute about the Signs of Allah but the Unbelievers. Let not, then, their strutting about through the land deceive thee!

كذبت قبلهم قوم نوح والأحزاب من بعدهم وهمت كل أمة برسولهم ليأخذوه وجادلوا بالباطل ليدحضوا به الحق فأخذتهم فكيف كان عقاب
But (there were people) before them, who denied (the Signs),- the People of Noah, and the Confederates (of Evil) after them; and every People plotted against their prophet, to seize him, and disputed by means of vanities, therewith to condemn the Truth; but it was I that seized them! and how (terrible) was My Requital!

وكذلك حقت كلمت ربك على الذين كفروا أنهم أصحاب النار
Thus was the Decree of thy Lord proved true against the Unbelievers; that truly they are Companions of the Fire!

الذين يحملون العرش ومن حوله يسبحون بحمد ربهم ويؤمنون به ويستغفرون للذين آمنوا ربنا وسعت كل شيء رحمة وعلما فاغفر للذين تابوا واتبعوا سبيلك وقهم عذاب الجحيم
Those who sustain the Throne (of Allah) and those around it Sing Glory and Praise to their Lord; believe in Him; and implore Forgiveness for those who believe: "Our Lord! Thy Reach is over all things, in Mercy and Knowledge. Forgive, then, those who turn in Repentance, and follow Thy Path; and preserve them from the Penalty of the Blazing Fire!

ربنا وأدخلهم جنات عدن التي وعدتهم ومن صلح من آبائهم وأزواجهم وذرياتهم إنك أنت العزيز الحكيم
"And grant, our Lord! that they enter the Gardens of Eternity, which Thou hast promised to them, and to the righteous among their fathers, their wives, and their posterity! For Thou art (He), the Exalted in Might, Full of Wisdom.

وقهم السيئات ومن تق السيئات يومئذ فقد رحمته وذلك هو الفوز العظيم
"And preserve them from (all) ills; and any whom Thou dost preserve from ills that Day,- on them wilt Thou have bestowed Mercy indeed: and that will be truly (for them) the highest Achievement".

إن الذين كفروا ينادون لمقت الله أكبر من مقتكم أنفسكم إذ تدعون إلى الإيمان فتكفرون
The Unbelievers will be addressed: "Greater was the aversion of Allah to you than (is) your aversion to yourselves, seeing that ye were called to the Faith and ye used to refuse."

قالوا ربنا أمتنا اثنتين وأحييتنا اثنتين فاعترفنا بذنوبنا فهل إلى خروج من سبيل
They will say: "Our Lord! twice hast Thou made us without life, and twice hast Thou given us Life! Now have we recognised our sins: Is there any way out (of this)?"

ذلكم بأنه إذا دعي الله وحده كفرتم وإن يشرك به تؤمنوا فالحكم لله العلي الكبير
(The answer will be:) "This is because, when Allah was invoked as the Only (object of worship), ye did reject Faith, but when partners were joined to Him, ye believed! the Command is with Allah, Most High, Most Great!"

هو الذي يريكم آياته وينزل لكم من السماء رزقا وما يتذكر إلا من ينيب
He it is Who showeth you his Signs, and sendeth down sustenance for you from the sky: but only those receive admonition who turn (to Allah).

فادعوا الله مخلصين له الدين ولو كره الكافرون
Call ye, then, upon Allah with sincere devotion to Him, even though the Unbelievers may detest it.

رفيع الدرجات ذو العرش يلقي الروح من أمره على من يشاء من عباده لينذر يوم التلاق
Raised high above ranks (or degrees), (He is) the Lord of the Throne (of Authority): by His Command doth He send the Spirit (of inspiration) to any of His servants he pleases, that it may warn (men) of the Day of Mutual Meeting,-

يوم هم بارزون لا يخفى على الله منهم شيء لمن الملك اليوم لله الواحد القهار
The Day whereon they will (all) come forth: not a single thing concerning them is hidden from Allah. Whose will be the dominion that Day?" That of Allah, the One the Irresistible!

اليوم تجزى كل نفس بما كسبت لا ظلم اليوم إن الله سريع الحساب
That Day will every soul be requited for what it earned; no injustice will there be that Day, for Allah is Swift in taking account.

وأنذرهم يوم الآزفة إذ القلوب لدى الحناجر كاظمين ما للظالمين من حميم ولا شفيع يطاع
Warn them of the Day that is (ever) drawing near, when the hearts will (come) right up to the throats to choke (them); No intimate friend nor intercessor will the wrong-doers have, who could be listened to.

يعلم خائنة الأعين وما تخفي الصدور
(Allah) knows of (the tricks) that deceive with the eyes, and all that the hearts (of men) conceal.

والله يقضي بالحق والذين يدعون من دونه لا يقضون بشيء إن الله هو السميع البصير
And Allah will judge with (justice and) Truth: but those whom (men) invoke besides Him, will not (be in a position) to judge at all. Verily it is Allah (alone) Who hears and sees (all things).

أولم يسيروا في الأرض فينظروا كيف كان عاقبة الذين كانوا من قبلهم كانوا هم أشد منهم قوة وآثارا في الأرض فأخذهم الله بذنوبهم وما كان لهم من الله من واق
Do they not travel through the earth and see what was the End of those before them? They were even superior to them in strength, and in the traces (they have left) in the land: but Allah did call them to account for their sins, and none had they to defend them against Allah.

ذلك بأنهم كانت تأتيهم رسلهم بالبينات فكفروا فأخذهم الله إنه قوي شديد العقاب
That was because there came to them their messengers with Clear (Signs), but they rejected them: So Allah called them to account: for He is Full of Strength, Strict in Punishment.

ولقد أرسلنا موسى بآياتنا وسلطان مبين
Of old We sent Moses, with Our Signs and an authority manifest,

إلى فرعون وهامان وقارون فقالوا ساحر كذاب
To Pharaoh, Haman, and Qarun; but they called (him)" a sorcerer telling lies!"...

فلما جاءهم بالحق من عندنا قالوا اقتلوا أبناء الذين آمنوا معه واستحيوا نساءهم وما كيد الكافرين إلا في ضلال
Now, when he came to them in Truth, from Us, they said, "Slay the sons of those who believe with him, and keep alive their females," but the plots of Unbelievers (end) in nothing but errors (and delusions)!...

وقال فرعون ذروني أقتل موسى وليدع ربه إني أخاف أن يبدل دينكم أو أن يظهر في الأرض الفساد
Said Pharaoh: "Leave me to slay Moses; and let him call on his Lord! What I fear is lest he should change your religion, or lest he should cause mischief to appear in the land!"

وقال موسى إني عذت بربي وربكم من كل متكبر لا يؤمن بيوم الحساب
Moses said: "I have indeed called upon my Lord and your Lord (for protection) from every arrogant one who believes not in the Day of Account!"

وقال رجل مؤمن من آل فرعون يكتم إيمانه أتقتلون رجلا أن يقول ربي الله وقد جاءكم بالبينات من ربكم وإن يك كاذبا فعليه كذبه وإن يك صادقا يصبكم بعض الذي يعدكم إن الله لا يهدي من هو مسرف كذاب
A believer, a man from among the people of Pharaoh, who had concealed his faith, said: "Will ye slay a man because he says, 'My Lord is Allah'?- when he has indeed come to you with Clear (Signs) from your Lord? and if he be a liar, on him is (the sin of) his lie: but, if he is telling the Truth, then will fall on you something of the (calamity) of which he warns you: Truly Allah guides not one who transgresses and lies!

يا قوم لكم الملك اليوم ظاهرين في الأرض فمن ينصرنا من بأس الله إن جاءنا قال فرعون ما أريكم إلا ما أرى وما أهديكم إلا سبيل الرشاد
"O my People! Yours is the dominion this day: Ye have the upper hand in the land: but who will help us from the Punishment of Allah, should it befall us?" Pharaoh said: "I but point out to you that which I see (myself); Nor do I guide you but to the Path of Right!"

وقال الذي آمن يا قوم إني أخاف عليكم مثل يوم الأحزاب
Then said the man who believed: "O my people! Truly I do fear for you something like the Day (of disaster) of the Confederates (in sin)!-

مثل دأب قوم نوح وعاد وثمود والذين من بعدهم وما الله يريد ظلما للعباد
"Something like the fate of the People of Noah, the 'Ad, and the Thamud, and those who came after them: but Allah never wishes injustice to his Servants.

ويا قوم إني أخاف عليكم يوم التناد
"And O my people! I fear for you a Day when there will be Mutual calling (and wailing),-

يوم تولون مدبرين ما لكم من الله من عاصم ومن يضلل الله فما له من هاد
"A Day when ye shall turn your backs and flee: No defender shall ye have from Allah: Any whom Allah leaves to stray, there is none to guide...

ولقد جاءكم يوسف من قبل بالبينات فما زلتم في شك مما جاءكم به حتى إذا هلك قلتم لن يبعث الله من بعده رسولا كذلك يضل الله من هو مسرف مرتاب
"And to you there came Joseph in times gone by, with Clear Signs, but ye ceased not to doubt of the (Mission) for which he had come: At length, when he died, ye said: 'No messenger will Allah send after him.' thus doth Allah leave to stray such as transgress and live in doubt,-

الذين يجادلون في آيات الله بغير سلطان أتاهم كبر مقتا عند الله وعند الذين آمنوا كذلك يطبع الله على كل قلب متكبر جبار
"(Such) as dispute about the Signs of Allah, without any authority that hath reached them, grievous and odious (is such conduct) in the sight of Allah and of the Believers. Thus doth Allah, seal up every heart - of arrogant and obstinate Transgressors."

وقال فرعون يا هامان ابن لي صرحا لعلي أبلغ الأسباب
Pharaoh said: "O Haman! Build me a lofty palace, that I may attain the ways and means-

أسباب السماوات فأطلع إلى إله موسى وإني لأظنه كاذبا وكذلك زين لفرعون سوء عمله وصد عن السبيل وما كيد فرعون إلا في تباب
"The ways and means of (reaching) the heavens, and that I may mount up to the god of Moses: But as far as I am concerned, I think (Moses) is a liar!" Thus was made alluring, in Pharaoh's eyes, the evil of his deeds, and he was hindered from the Path; and the plot of Pharaoh led to nothing but perdition (for him).

وقال الذي آمن يا قوم اتبعون أهدكم سبيل الرشاد
The man who believed said further: "O my people! Follow me: I will lead you to the Path of Right.

يا قوم إنما هذه الحياة الدنيا متاع وإن الآخرة هي دار القرار
"O my people! This life of the present is nothing but (temporary) convenience: It is the Hereafter that is the Home that will last.

من عمل سيئة فلا يجزى إلا مثلها ومن عمل صالحا من ذكر أو أنثى وهو مؤمن فأولئك يدخلون الجنة يرزقون فيها بغير حساب
"He that works evil will not be requited but by the like thereof: and he that works a righteous deed - whether man or woman - and is a Believer- such will enter the Garden (of Bliss): Therein will they have abundance without measure.

ويا قوم ما لي أدعوكم إلى النجاة وتدعونني إلى النار
"And O my people! How (strange) it is for me to call you to Salvation while ye call me to the Fire!

تدعونني لأكفر بالله وأشرك به ما ليس لي به علم وأنا أدعوكم إلى العزيز الغفار
"Ye do call upon me to blaspheme against Allah, and to join with Him partners of whom I have no knowledge; and I call you to the Exalted in Power, Who forgives again and again!"

لا جرم أنما تدعونني إليه ليس له دعوة في الدنيا ولا في الآخرة وأن مردنا إلى الله وأن المسرفين هم أصحاب النار
"Without doubt ye do call me to one who is not fit to be called to, whether in this world, or in the Hereafter; our return will be to Allah; and the Transgressors will be Companions of the Fire!

فستذكرون ما أقول لكم وأفوض أمري إلى الله إن الله بصير بالعباد
"Soon will ye remember what I say to you (now), My (own) affair I commit to Allah: for Allah (ever) watches over His Servants."

فوقاه الله سيئات ما مكروا وحاق بآل فرعون سوء العذاب
Then Allah saved him from (every) ill that they plotted (against him), but the burnt of the Penalty encompassed on all sides the People of Pharaoh.

النار يعرضون عليها غدوا وعشيا ويوم تقوم الساعة أدخلوا آل فرعون أشد العذاب
In front of the Fire will they be brought, morning and evening: And (the sentence will be) on the Day that Judgment will be established: "Cast ye the People of Pharaoh into the severest Penalty!"

وإذ يتحاجون في النار فيقول الضعفاء للذين استكبروا إنا كنا لكم تبعا فهل أنتم مغنون عنا نصيبا من النار
Behold, they will dispute with each other in the Fire! The weak ones (who followed) will say to those who had been arrogant, "We but followed you: Can ye then take (on yourselves) from us some share of the Fire?

قال الذين استكبروا إنا كل فيها إن الله قد حكم بين العباد
Those who had been arrogant will say: "We are all in this (Fire)! Truly, Allah has judged between (his) Servants!"

وقال الذين في النار لخزنة جهنم ادعوا ربكم يخفف عنا يوما من العذاب
Those in the Fire will say to the Keepers of Hell: "Pray to your Lord to lighten us the Penalty for a day (at least)!"

قالوا أولم تك تأتيكم رسلكم بالبينات قالوا بلى قالوا فادعوا وما دعاء الكافرين إلا في ضلال
They will say: "Did there not come to you your messengers with Clear Signs?" They will say, "Yes". They will reply, "Then pray (as ye like)! But the prayer of those without Faith is nothing but (futile wandering) in (mazes of) error!"

إنا لننصر رسلنا والذين آمنوا في الحياة الدنيا ويوم يقوم الأشهاد
We will, without doubt, help our messengers and those who believe, (both) in this world's life and on the Day when the Witnesses will stand forth,-

يوم لا ينفع الظالمين معذرتهم ولهم اللعنة ولهم سوء الدار
The Day when no profit will it be to Wrong-doers to present their excuses, but they will (only) have the Curse and the Home of Misery.

ولقد آتينا موسى الهدى وأورثنا بني إسرائيل الكتاب
We did aforetime give Moses the (Book of) Guidance, and We gave the book in inheritance to the Children of Israel,-

هدى وذكرى لأولي الألباب
A Guide and a Message to men of Understanding.

فاصبر إن وعد الله حق واستغفر لذنبك وسبح بحمد ربك بالعشي والإبكار
Patiently, then, persevere: for the Promise of Allah is true: and ask forgiveness for thy fault, and celebrate the Praises of thy Lord in the evening and in the morning.

إن الذين يجادلون في آيات الله بغير سلطان أتاهم إن في صدورهم إلا كبر ما هم ببالغيه فاستعذ بالله إنه هو السميع البصير
Those who dispute about the signs of Allah without any authority bestowed on them,- there is nothing in their breasts but (the quest of) greatness, which they shall never attain to: seek refuge, then, in Allah: It is He Who hears and sees (all things).

لخلق السماوات والأرض أكبر من خلق الناس ولكن أكثر الناس لا يعلمون
Assuredly the creation of the heavens and the earth is a greater (matter) than the creation of men: Yet most men understand not.

وما يستوي الأعمى والبصير والذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات ولا المسيء قليلا ما تتذكرون
Not equal are the blind and those who (clearly) see: Nor are (equal) those who believe and work deeds of righteousness, and those who do evil. Little do ye learn by admonition!

إن الساعة لآتية لا ريب فيها ولكن أكثر الناس لا يؤمنون
The Hour will certainly come: Therein is no doubt: Yet most men believe not.

وقال ربكم ادعوني أستجب لكم إن الذين يستكبرون عن عبادتي سيدخلون جهنم داخرين
And your Lord says: "Call on Me; I will answer your (Prayer): but those who are too arrogant to serve Me will surely find themselves in Hell - in humiliation!"

الله الذي جعل لكم الليل لتسكنوا فيه والنهار مبصرا إن الله لذو فضل على الناس ولكن أكثر الناس لا يشكرون
It is Allah Who has made the Night for you, that ye may rest therein, and the days as that which helps (you) to see. Verily Allah is full of Grace and Bounty to men: yet most men give no thanks.

ذلكم الله ربكم خالق كل شيء لا إله إلا هو فأنى تؤفكون
Such is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of all things, there is no god but He: Then how ye are deluded away from the Truth!

كذلك يؤفك الذين كانوا بآيات الله يجحدون
Thus are deluded those who are wont to reject the Signs of Allah.

الله الذي جعل لكم الأرض قرارا والسماء بناء وصوركم فأحسن صوركم ورزقكم من الطيبات ذلكم الله ربكم فتبارك الله رب العالمين
It is Allah Who has made for you the earth as a resting place, and the sky as a canopy, and has given you shape- and made your shapes beautiful,- and has provided for you Sustenance, of things pure and good;- such is Allah your Lord. So Glory to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds!

هو الحي لا إله إلا هو فادعوه مخلصين له الدين الحمد لله رب العالمين
He is the Living (One): There is no god but He: Call upon Him, giving Him sincere devotion. Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds!

قل إني نهيت أن أعبد الذين تدعون من دون الله لما جاءني البينات من ربي وأمرت أن أسلم لرب العالمين
Say: "I have been forbidden to invoke those whom ye invoke besides Allah,- seeing that the Clear Signs have come to me from my Lord; and I have been commanded to bow (in Islam) to the Lord of the Worlds."

هو الذي خلقكم من تراب ثم من نطفة ثم من علقة ثم يخرجكم طفلا ثم لتبلغوا أشدكم ثم لتكونوا شيوخا ومنكم من يتوفى من قبل ولتبلغوا أجلا مسمى ولعلكم تعقلون
It is He Who has created you from dust then from a sperm-drop, then from a leech-like clot; then does he get you out (into the light) as a child: then lets you (grow and) reach your age of full strength; then lets you become old,- though of you there are some who die before;- and lets you reach a Term appointed; in order that ye may learn wisdom.

هو الذي يحيي ويميت فإذا قضى أمرا فإنما يقول له كن فيكون
It is He Who gives Life and Death; and when He decides upon an affair, He says to it, "Be", and it is.

ألم تر إلى الذين يجادلون في آيات الله أنى يصرفون
Seest thou not those that dispute concerning the Signs of Allah? How are they turned away (from Reality)?-

الذين كذبوا بالكتاب وبما أرسلنا به رسلنا فسوف يعلمون
Those who reject the Book and the (revelations) with which We sent our messengers: but soon shall they know,-

إذ الأغلال في أعناقهم والسلاسل يسحبون
When the yokes (shall be) round their necks, and the chains; they shall be dragged along-

في الحميم ثم في النار يسجرون
In the boiling fetid fluid: then in the Fire shall they be burned;

ثم قيل لهم أين ما كنتم تشركون
Then shall it be said to them: "Where are the (deities) to which ye gave part-worship-

من دون الله قالوا ضلوا عنا بل لم نكن ندعو من قبل شيئا كذلك يضل الله الكافرين
"In derogation of Allah?" They will reply: "They have left us in the lurch: Nay, we invoked not, of old, anything (that had real existence)." Thus does Allah leave the Unbelievers to stray.

ذلكم بما كنتم تفرحون في الأرض بغير الحق وبما كنتم تمرحون
"That was because ye were wont to rejoice on the earth in things other than the Truth, and that ye were wont to be insolent.

ادخلوا أبواب جهنم خالدين فيها فبئس مثوى المتكبرين
"Enter ye the gates of Hell, to dwell therein: and evil is (this) abode of the arrogant!"

فاصبر إن وعد الله حق فإما نرينك بعض الذي نعدهم أو نتوفينك فإلينا يرجعون
So persevere in patience; for the Promise of Allah is true: and whether We show thee (in this life) some part of what We promise them,- or We take thy soul (to Our Mercy) (before that),-(in any case) it is to Us that they shall (all) return.

ولقد أرسلنا رسلا من قبلك منهم من قصصنا عليك ومنهم من لم نقصص عليك وما كان لرسول أن يأتي بآية إلا بإذن الله فإذا جاء أمر الله قضي بالحق وخسر هنالك المبطلون
We did aforetime send messengers before thee: of them there are some whose story We have related to thee, and some whose story We have not related to thee. It was not (possible) for any messenger to bring a sign except by the leave of Allah: but when the Command of Allah issued, the matter was decided in truth and justice, and there perished, there and then those who stood on Falsehoods.

الله الذي جعل لكم الأنعام لتركبوا منها ومنها تأكلون
It is Allah Who made cattle for you, that ye may use some for riding and some for food;

ولكم فيها منافع ولتبلغوا عليها حاجة في صدوركم وعليها وعلى الفلك تحملون
And there are (other) advantages in them for you (besides); that ye may through them attain to any need (there may be) in your hearts; and on them and on ships ye are carried.

ويريكم آياته فأي آيات الله تنكرون
And He shows you (always) His Signs: then which of the Signs of Allah will ye deny?

أفلم يسيروا في الأرض فينظروا كيف كان عاقبة الذين من قبلهم كانوا أكثر منهم وأشد قوة وآثارا في الأرض فما أغنى عنهم ما كانوا يكسبون
Do they not travel through the earth and see what was the End of those before them? They were more numerous than these and superior in strength and in the traces (they have left) in the land: Yet all that they accomplished was of no profit to them.

فلما جاءتهم رسلهم بالبينات فرحوا بما عندهم من العلم وحاق بهم ما كانوا به يستهزئون
For when their messengers came to them with Clear Signs, they exulted in such knowledge (and skill) as they had; but that very (Wrath) at which they were wont to scoff hemmed them in.

فلما رأوا بأسنا قالوا آمنا بالله وحده وكفرنا بما كنا به مشركين
But when they saw Our Punishment, they said: "We believe in Allah,- the one Allah - and we reject the partners we used to join with Him."

فلم يك ينفعهم إيمانهم لما رأوا بأسنا سنت الله التي قد خلت في عباده وخسر هنالك الكافرون
But their professing the Faith when they (actually) saw Our Punishment was not going to profit them. (Such has been) Allah's Way of dealing with His Servants (from the most ancient times). And even thus did the Rejecters of Allah perish (utterly)!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم حم
Ha Mim:

تنزيل من الرحمن الرحيم
A Revelation from (Allah), Most Gracious, Most Merciful;-

كتاب فصلت آياته قرآنا عربيا لقوم يعلمون
A Book, whereof the verses are explained in detail;- a Qur'an in Arabic, for people who understand;-

بشيرا ونذيرا فأعرض أكثرهم فهم لا يسمعون
Giving good news and admonition: yet most of them turn away, and so they hear not.

وقالوا قلوبنا في أكنة مما تدعونا إليه وفي آذاننا وقر ومن بيننا وبينك حجاب فاعمل إننا عاملون
They say: "Our hearts are under veils, (concealed) from that to which thou dost invite us, and in our ears in a deafness, and between us and thee is a screen: so do thou (what thou wilt); for us, we shall do (what we will!)"

قل إنما أنا بشر مثلكم يوحى إلي أنما إلهكم إله واحد فاستقيموا إليه واستغفروه وويل للمشركين
Say thou: "I am but a man like you: It is revealed to me by Inspiration, that your Allah is one Allah: so stand true to Him, and ask for His Forgiveness." And woe to those who join gods with Allah,-

الذين لا يؤتون الزكاة وهم بالآخرة هم كافرون
Those who practise not regular Charity, and who even deny the Hereafter.

إن الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات لهم أجر غير ممنون
For those who believe and work deeds of righteousness is a reward that will never fail.

قل أئنكم لتكفرون بالذي خلق الأرض في يومين وتجعلون له أندادا ذلك رب العالمين
Say: Is it that ye deny Him Who created the earth in two Days? And do ye join equals with Him? He is the Lord of (all) the Worlds.

وجعل فيها رواسي من فوقها وبارك فيها وقدر فيها أقواتها في أربعة أيام سواء للسائلين
He set on the (earth), mountains standing firm, high above it, and bestowed blessings on the earth, and measure therein all things to give them nourishment in due proportion, in four Days, in accordance with (the needs of) those who seek (Sustenance).

ثم استوى إلى السماء وهي دخان فقال لها وللأرض ائتيا طوعا أو كرها قالتا أتينا طائعين
Moreover He comprehended in His design the sky, and it had been (as) smoke: He said to it and to the earth: "Come ye together, willingly or unwillingly." They said: "We do come (together), in willing obedience."

فقضاهن سبع سماوات في يومين وأوحى في كل سماء أمرها وزينا السماء الدنيا بمصابيح وحفظا ذلك تقدير العزيز العليم
So He completed them as seven firmaments in two Days, and He assigned to each heaven its duty and command. And We adorned the lower heaven with lights, and (provided it) with guard. Such is the Decree of (Him) the Exalted in Might, Full of Knowledge.

فإن أعرضوا فقل أنذرتكم صاعقة مثل صاعقة عاد وثمود
But if they turn away, say thou: "I have warned you of a stunning Punishment (as of thunder and lightning) like that which (overtook) the 'Ad and the Thamud!"

إذ جاءتهم الرسل من بين أيديهم ومن خلفهم ألا تعبدوا إلا الله قالوا لو شاء ربنا لأنزل ملائكة فإنا بما أرسلتم به كافرون
Behold, the messengers came to them, from before them and behind them, (preaching): "Serve none but Allah." They said, "If our Lord had so pleased, He would certainly have sent down angels (to preach). Now we reject your mission (altogether)."

فأما عاد فاستكبروا في الأرض بغير الحق وقالوا من أشد منا قوة أولم يروا أن الله الذي خلقهم هو أشد منهم قوة وكانوا بآياتنا يجحدون
Now the 'Ad behaved arrogantly through the land, against (all) truth and reason, and said: "Who is superior to us in strength?" What! did they not see that Allah, Who created them, was superior to them in strength? But they continued to reject Our Signs!

فأرسلنا عليهم ريحا صرصرا في أيام نحسات لنذيقهم عذاب الخزي في الحياة الدنيا ولعذاب الآخرة أخزى وهم لا ينصرون
So We sent against them a furious Wind through days of disaster, that We might give them a taste of a Penalty of humiliation in this life; but the Penalty of a Hereafter will be more humiliating still: and they will find no help.

وأما ثمود فهديناهم فاستحبوا العمى على الهدى فأخذتهم صاعقة العذاب الهون بما كانوا يكسبون
As to the Thamud, We gave them Guidance, but they preferred blindness (of heart) to Guidance: so the stunning Punishment of humiliation seized them, because of what they had earned.

ونجينا الذين آمنوا وكانوا يتقون
But We delivered those who believed and practised righteousness.

ويوم يحشر أعداء الله إلى النار فهم يوزعون
On the Day that the enemies of Allah will be gathered together to the Fire, they will be marched in ranks.

حتى إذا ما جاءوها شهد عليهم سمعهم وأبصارهم وجلودهم بما كانوا يعملون
At length, when they reach the (Fire), their hearing, their sight, and their skins will bear witness against them, as to (all) their deeds.

وقالوا لجلودهم لم شهدتم علينا قالوا أنطقنا الله الذي أنطق كل شيء وهو خلقكم أول مرة وإليه ترجعون
They will say to their skins: "Why bear ye witness against us?" They will say: "Allah hath given us speech,- (He) Who giveth speech to everything: He created you for the first time, and unto Him were ye to return.

وما كنتم تستترون أن يشهد عليكم سمعكم ولا أبصاركم ولا جلودكم ولكن ظننتم أن الله لا يعلم كثيرا مما تعملون
"Ye did not seek to hide yourselves, lest your hearing, your sight, and your skins should bear witness against you! But ye did think that Allah knew not many of the things that ye used to do!

وذلكم ظنكم الذي ظننتم بربكم أرداكم فأصبحتم من الخاسرين
"But this thought of yours which ye did entertain concerning your Lord, hath brought you to destruction, and (now) have ye become of those utterly lost!"

فإن يصبروا فالنار مثوى لهم وإن يستعتبوا فما هم من المعتبين
If, then, they have patience, the Fire will be a home for them! and if they beg to be received into favour, into favour will they not (then) be received.

وقيضنا لهم قرناء فزينوا لهم ما بين أيديهم وما خلفهم وحق عليهم القول في أمم قد خلت من قبلهم من الجن والإنس إنهم كانوا خاسرين
And We have destined for them intimate companions (of like nature), who made alluring to them what was before them and behind them; and the sentence among the previous generations of Jinns and men, who have passed away, is proved against them; for they are utterly lost.

وقال الذين كفروا لا تسمعوا لهذا القرآن والغوا فيه لعلكم تغلبون
The Unbelievers say: "Listen not to this Qur'an, but talk at random in the midst of its (reading), that ye may gain the upper hand!"

فلنذيقن الذين كفروا عذابا شديدا ولنجزينهم أسوأ الذي كانوا يعملون
But We will certainly give the Unbelievers a taste of a severe Penalty, and We will requite them for the worst of their deeds.

ذلك جزاء أعداء الله النار لهم فيها دار الخلد جزاء بما كانوا بآياتنا يجحدون
Such is the requital of the enemies of Allah,- the Fire: therein will be for them the Eternal Home: a (fit) requital, for that they were wont to reject Our Signs.

وقال الذين كفروا ربنا أرنا اللذين أضلانا من الجن والإنس نجعلهما تحت أقدامنا ليكونا من الأسفلين
And the Unbelievers will say: "Our Lord! Show us those, among Jinns and men, who misled us: We shall crush them beneath our feet, so that they become the vilest (before all)."

إن الذين قالوا ربنا الله ثم استقاموا تتنزل عليهم الملائكة ألا تخافوا ولا تحزنوا وأبشروا بالجنة التي كنتم توعدون
In the case of those who say, "Our Lord is Allah", and, further, stand straight and steadfast, the angels descend on them (from time to time): "Fear ye not!" (they suggest), "Nor grieve! but receive the Glad Tidings of the Garden (of Bliss), the which ye were promised!

نحن أولياؤكم في الحياة الدنيا وفي الآخرة ولكم فيها ما تشتهي أنفسكم ولكم فيها ما تدعون
"We are your protectors in this life and in the Hereafter: therein shall ye have all that your souls shall desire; therein shall ye have all that ye ask for!-

نزلا من غفور رحيم
"A hospitable gift from one Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful!"

ومن أحسن قولا ممن دعا إلى الله وعمل صالحا وقال إنني من المسلمين
Who is better in speech than one who calls (men) to Allah, works righteousness, and says, "I am of those who bow in Islam"?

ولا تستوي الحسنة ولا السيئة ادفع بالتي هي أحسن فإذا الذي بينك وبينه عداوة كأنه ولي حميم
Nor can goodness and Evil be equal. Repel (Evil) with what is better: Then will he between whom and thee was hatred become as it were thy friend and intimate!

وما يلقاها إلا الذين صبروا وما يلقاها إلا ذو حظ عظيم
And no one will be granted such goodness except those who exercise patience and self-restraint,- none but persons of the greatest good fortune.

وإما ينزغنك من الشيطان نزغ فاستعذ بالله إنه هو السميع العليم
And if (at any time) an incitement to discord is made to thee by the Evil One, seek refuge in Allah. He is the One Who hears and knows all things.

ومن آياته الليل والنهار والشمس والقمر لا تسجدوا للشمس ولا للقمر واسجدوا لله الذي خلقهن إن كنتم إياه تعبدون
Among His Signs are the Night and the Day, and the Sun and the Moon. Do not prostrate to the sun and the moon, but prostrate to Allah, Who created them, if it is Him ye wish to serve.

فإن استكبروا فالذين عند ربك يسبحون له بالليل والنهار وهم لا يسأمون
But is the (Unbelievers) are arrogant, (no matter): for in the presence of thy Lord are those who celebrate His praises by night and by day. And they never flag (nor feel themselves above it).

ومن آياته أنك ترى الأرض خاشعة فإذا أنزلنا عليها الماء اهتزت وربت إن الذي أحياها لمحيي الموتى إنه على كل شيء قدير
And among His Signs in this: thou seest the earth barren and desolate; but when We send down rain to it, it is stirred to life and yields increase. Truly, He Who gives life to the (dead) earth can surely give life to (men) who are dead. For He has power over all things.

إن الذين يلحدون في آياتنا لا يخفون علينا أفمن يلقى في النار خير أم من يأتي آمنا يوم القيامة اعملوا ما شئتم إنه بما تعملون بصير
Those who pervert the Truth in Our Signs are not hidden from Us. Which is better?- he that is cast into the Fire, or he that comes safe through, on the Day of Judgment? Do what ye will: verily He seeth (clearly) all that ye do.

إن الذين كفروا بالذكر لما جاءهم وإنه لكتاب عزيز
Those who reject the Message when it comes to them (are not hidden from Us). And indeed it is a Book of exalted power.

لا يأتيه الباطل من بين يديه ولا من خلفه تنزيل من حكيم حميد
No falsehood can approach it from before or behind it: It is sent down by One Full of Wisdom, Worthy of all Praise.

ما يقال لك إلا ما قد قيل للرسل من قبلك إن ربك لذو مغفرة وذو عقاب أليم
Nothing is said to thee that was not said to the messengers before thee: that thy lord has at his Command (all) forgiveness as well as a most Grievous Penalty.

ولو جعلناه قرآنا أعجميا لقالوا لولا فصلت آياته أأعجمي وعربي قل هو للذين آمنوا هدى وشفاء والذين لا يؤمنون في آذانهم وقر وهو عليهم عمى أولئك ينادون من مكان بعيد
Had We sent this as a Qur'an (in the language) other than Arabic, they would have said: "Why are not its verses explained in detail? What! (a Book) not in Arabic and (a Messenger an Arab?" Say: "It is a Guide and a Healing to those who believe; and for those who believe not, there is a deafness in their ears, and it is blindness in their (eyes): They are (as it were) being called from a place far distant!"

ولقد آتينا موسى الكتاب فاختلف فيه ولولا كلمة سبقت من ربك لقضي بينهم وإنهم لفي شك منه مريب
We certainly gave Moses the Book aforetime: but disputes arose therein. Had it not been for a Word that went forth before from thy Lord, (their differences) would have been settled between them: but they remained in suspicious disquieting doubt thereon.

من عمل صالحا فلنفسه ومن أساء فعليها وما ربك بظلام للعبيد
Whoever works righteousness benefits his own soul; whoever works evil, it is against his own soul: nor is thy Lord ever unjust (in the least) to His Servants.

إليه يرد علم الساعة وما تخرج من ثمرات من أكمامها وما تحمل من أنثى ولا تضع إلا بعلمه ويوم يناديهم أين شركائي قالوا آذناك ما منا من شهيد
To Him is referred the Knowledge of the Hour (of Judgment: He knows all): No date-fruit comes out of its sheath, nor does a female conceive (within her womb) nor bring forth the Day that (Allah) will propound to them the (question), "Where are the partners (ye attributed to Me?" They will say, "We do assure thee not one of us can bear witness!"

وضل عنهم ما كانوا يدعون من قبل وظنوا ما لهم من محيص
The (deities) they used to invoke aforetime will leave them in the lurch, and they will perceive that they have no way of escape.

لا يسأم الإنسان من دعاء الخير وإن مسه الشر فيئوس قنوط
Man does not weary of asking for good (things), but if ill touches him, he gives up all hope (and) is lost in despair.

ولئن أذقناه رحمة منا من بعد ضراء مسته ليقولن هذا لي وما أظن الساعة قائمة ولئن رجعت إلى ربي إن لي عنده للحسنى فلننبئن الذين كفروا بما عملوا ولنذيقنهم من عذاب غليظ
When we give him a taste of some Mercy from Ourselves, after some adversity has touched him, he is sure to say, "This is due to my (merit): I think not that the Hour (of Judgment) will (ever) be established; but if I am brought back to my Lord, I have (much) good (stored) in His sight!" But We will show the Unbelievers the truth of all that they did, and We shall give them the taste of a severe Penalty.

وإذا أنعمنا على الإنسان أعرض ونأى بجانبه وإذا مسه الشر فذو دعاء عريض
When We bestow favours on man, he turns away, and gets himself remote on his side (instead of coming to Us); and when evil seizes him, (he comes) full of prolonged prayer!

قل أرأيتم إن كان من عند الله ثم كفرتم به من أضل ممن هو في شقاق بعيد
Say: "See ye if the (Revelation) is (really) from Allah, and yet do ye reject it? Who is more astray than one who is in a schism far (from any purpose)?"

سنريهم آياتنا في الآفاق وفي أنفسهم حتى يتبين لهم أنه الحق أولم يكف بربك أنه على كل شيء شهيد
Soon will We show them our Signs in the (furthest) regions (of the earth), and in their own souls, until it becomes manifest to them that this is the Truth. Is it not enough that thy Lord doth witness all things?

ألا إنهم في مرية من لقاء ربهم ألا إنه بكل شيء محيط
Ah indeed! Are they in doubt concerning the Meeting with their Lord? Ah indeed! It is He that doth encompass all things!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم حم
Ha-Mim

عسق
'Ain. Sin. Qaf.

كذلك يوحي إليك وإلى الذين من قبلك الله العزيز الحكيم
Thus doth (He) send inspiration to thee as (He did) to those before thee,- Allah, Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom.

له ما في السماوات وما في الأرض وهو العلي العظيم
To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth: and He is Most High, Most Great.

تكاد السماوات يتفطرن من فوقهن والملائكة يسبحون بحمد ربهم ويستغفرون لمن في الأرض ألا إن الله هو الغفور الرحيم
The heavens are almost rent asunder from above them (by Him Glory): and the angels celebrate the Praises of their Lord, and pray for forgiveness for (all) beings on earth: Behold! Verily Allah is He, the Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

والذين اتخذوا من دونه أولياء الله حفيظ عليهم وما أنت عليهم بوكيل
And those who take as protectors others besides Him,- Allah doth watch over them; and thou art not the disposer of their affairs.

وكذلك أوحينا إليك قرآنا عربيا لتنذر أم القرى ومن حولها وتنذر يوم الجمع لا ريب فيه فريق في الجنة وفريق في السعير
Thus have We sent by inspiration to thee an Arabic Qur'an: that thou mayest warn the Mother of Cities and all around her,- and warn (them) of the Day of Assembly, of which there is no doubt: (when) some will be in the Garden, and some in the Blazing Fire.

ولو شاء الله لجعلهم أمة واحدة ولكن يدخل من يشاء في رحمته والظالمون ما لهم من ولي ولا نصير
If Allah had so willed, He could have made them a single people; but He admits whom He will to His Mercy; and the Wrong-doers will have no protector nor helper.

أم اتخذوا من دونه أولياء فالله هو الولي وهو يحيي الموتى وهو على كل شيء قدير
What! Have they taken (for worship) protectors besides Him? But it is Allah,- He is the Protector, and it is He Who gives life to the dead: It is He Who has power over all things,

وما اختلفتم فيه من شيء فحكمه إلى الله ذلكم الله ربي عليه توكلت وإليه أنيب
Whatever it be wherein ye differ, the decision thereof is with Allah: such is Allah my Lord: In Him I trust, and to Him I turn.

فاطر السماوات والأرض جعل لكم من أنفسكم أزواجا ومن الأنعام أزواجا يذرؤكم فيه ليس كمثله شيء وهو السميع البصير
(He is) the Creator of the heavens and the earth: He has made for you pairs from among yourselves, and pairs among cattle: by this means does He multiply you: there is nothing whatever like unto Him, and He is the One that hears and sees (all things).

له مقاليد السماوات والأرض يبسط الرزق لمن يشاء ويقدر إنه بكل شيء عليم
To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth: He enlarges and restricts. The Sustenance to whom He will: for He knows full well all things.

شرع لكم من الدين ما وصى به نوحا والذي أوحينا إليك وما وصينا به إبراهيم وموسى وعيسى أن أقيموا الدين ولا تتفرقوا فيه كبر على المشركين ما تدعوهم إليه الله يجتبي إليه من يشاء ويهدي إليه من ينيب
The same religion has He established for you as that which He enjoined on Noah - the which We have sent by inspiration to thee - and that which We enjoined on Abraham, Moses, and Jesus: Namely, that ye should remain steadfast in religion, and make no divisions therein: to those who worship other things than Allah, hard is the (way) to which thou callest them. Allah chooses to Himself those whom He pleases, and guides to Himself those who turn (to Him).

وما تفرقوا إلا من بعد ما جاءهم العلم بغيا بينهم ولولا كلمة سبقت من ربك إلى أجل مسمى لقضي بينهم وإن الذين أورثوا الكتاب من بعدهم لفي شك منه مريب
And they became divided only after Knowledge reached them,- through selfish envy as between themselves. Had it not been for a Word that went forth before from thy Lord, (tending) to a Term appointed, the matter would have been settled between them: But truly those who have inherited the Book after them are in suspicious (disquieting) doubt concerning it.

فلذلك فادع واستقم كما أمرت ولا تتبع أهواءهم وقل آمنت بما أنزل الله من كتاب وأمرت لأعدل بينكم الله ربنا وربكم لنا أعمالنا ولكم أعمالكم لا حجة بيننا وبينكم الله يجمع بيننا وإليه المصير
Now then, for that (reason), call (them to the Faith), and stand steadfast as thou art commanded, nor follow thou their vain desires; but say: "I believe in the Book which Allah has sent down; and I am commanded to judge justly between you. Allah is our Lord and your Lord: for us (is the responsibility for) our deeds, and for you for your deeds. There is no contention between us and you. Allah will bring us together, and to Him is (our) Final Goal.

والذين يحاجون في الله من بعد ما استجيب له حجتهم داحضة عند ربهم وعليهم غضب ولهم عذاب شديد
But those who dispute concerning Allah after He has been accepted,- futile is their dispute in the Sight of their Lord: on them will be a Penalty terrible.

الله الذي أنزل الكتاب بالحق والميزان وما يدريك لعل الساعة قريب
It is Allah Who has sent down the Book in Truth, and the Balance (by which to weigh conduct). And what will make thee realise that perhaps the Hour is close at hand?

يستعجل بها الذين لا يؤمنون بها والذين آمنوا مشفقون منها ويعلمون أنها الحق ألا إن الذين يمارون في الساعة لفي ضلال بعيد
Only those wish to hasten it who believe not in it: those who believe hold it in awe, and know that it is the Truth. Behold, verily those that dispute concerning the Hour are far astray.

الله لطيف بعباده يرزق من يشاء وهو القوي العزيز
Gracious is Allah to His servants: He gives Sustenance to whom He pleases: and He has power and can carry out His Will.

من كان يريد حرث الآخرة نزد له في حرثه ومن كان يريد حرث الدنيا نؤته منها وما له في الآخرة من نصيب
To any that desires the tilth of the Hereafter, We give increase in his tilth, and to any that desires the tilth of this world, We grant somewhat thereof, but he has no share or lot in the Hereafter.

أم لهم شركاء شرعوا لهم من الدين ما لم يأذن به الله ولولا كلمة الفصل لقضي بينهم وإن الظالمين لهم عذاب أليم
What! have they partners (in godhead), who have established for them some religion without the permission of Allah? Had it not been for the Decree of Judgment, the matter would have been decided between them (at once). But verily the Wrong-doers will have a grievous Penalty.

ترى الظالمين مشفقين مما كسبوا وهو واقع بهم والذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات في روضات الجنات لهم ما يشاءون عند ربهم ذلك هو الفضل الكبير
Thou wilt see the Wrong-doers in fear on account of what they have earned, and (the burden of) that must (necessarily) fall on them. But those who believe and work righteous deeds will be in the luxuriant meads of the Gardens: they shall have, before their Lord, all that they wish for. That will indeed be the magnificent Bounty (of Allah).

ذلك الذي يبشر الله عباده الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات قل لا أسألكم عليه أجرا إلا المودة في القربى ومن يقترف حسنة نزد له فيها حسنا إن الله غفور شكور
That is (the Bounty) whereof Allah gives Glad Tidings to His Servants who believe and do righteous deeds. Say: "No reward do I ask of you for this except the love of those near of kin." And if any one earns any good, We shall give him an increase of good in respect thereof: for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Ready to appreciate (service).

أم يقولون افترى على الله كذبا فإن يشإ الله يختم على قلبك ويمح الله الباطل ويحق الحق بكلماته إنه عليم بذات الصدور
What! Do they say, "He has forged a falsehood against Allah"? But if Allah willed, He could seal up thy heart. And Allah blots out Vanity, and proves the Truth by His Words. For He knows well the secrets of all hearts.

وهو الذي يقبل التوبة عن عباده ويعفو عن السيئات ويعلم ما تفعلون
He is the One that accepts repentance from His Servants and forgives sins: and He knows all that ye do.

ويستجيب الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات ويزيدهم من فضله والكافرون لهم عذاب شديد
And He listens to those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, and gives them increase of His Bounty: but for the Unbelievers their is a terrible Penalty.

ولو بسط الله الرزق لعباده لبغوا في الأرض ولكن ينزل بقدر ما يشاء إنه بعباده خبير بصير
If Allah were to enlarge the provision for His Servants, they would indeed transgress beyond all bounds through the earth; but he sends (it) down in due measure as He pleases. For He is with His Servants Well-acquainted, Watchful.

وهو الذي ينزل الغيث من بعد ما قنطوا وينشر رحمته وهو الولي الحميد
He is the One that sends down rain (even) after (men) have given up all hope, and scatters His Mercy (far and wide). And He is the Protector, Worthy of all Praise.

ومن آياته خلق السماوات والأرض وما بث فيهما من دابة وهو على جمعهم إذا يشاء قدير
And among His Signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the living creatures that He has scattered through them: and He has power to gather them together when He wills.

وما أصابكم من مصيبة فبما كسبت أيديكم ويعفو عن كثير
Whatever misfortune happens to you, is because on the things your hands have wrought, and for many (of them) He grants forgiveness.

وما أنتم بمعجزين في الأرض وما لكم من دون الله من ولي ولا نصير
Nor can ye frustrate (aught), (fleeing) through the earth; nor have ye, besides Allah, any one to protect or to help.

ومن آياته الجوار في البحر كالأعلام
And among His Signs are the ships, smooth-running through the ocean, (tall) as mountains.

إن يشأ يسكن الريح فيظللن رواكد على ظهره إن في ذلك لآيات لكل صبار شكور
If it be His Will He can still the Wind: then would they become motionless on the back of the (ocean). Verily in this are Signs for everyone who patiently perseveres and is grateful.

أو يوبقهن بما كسبوا ويعف عن كثير
Or He can cause them to perish because of the (evil) which (the men) have earned; but much doth He forgive.

ويعلم الذين يجادلون في آياتنا ما لهم من محيص
But let those know, who dispute about Our Signs, that there is for them no way of escape.

فما أوتيتم من شيء فمتاع الحياة الدنيا وما عند الله خير وأبقى للذين آمنوا وعلى ربهم يتوكلون
Whatever ye are given (here) is (but) a convenience of this life: but that which is with Allah is better and more lasting: (it is) for those who believe and put their trust in their Lord:

والذين يجتنبون كبائر الإثم والفواحش وإذا ما غضبوا هم يغفرون
Those who avoid the greater crimes and shameful deeds, and, when they are angry even then forgive;

والذين استجابوا لربهم وأقاموا الصلاة وأمرهم شورى بينهم ومما رزقناهم ينفقون
Those who hearken to their Lord, and establish regular Prayer; who (conduct) their affairs by mutual Consultation; who spend out of what We bestow on them for Sustenance;

والذين إذا أصابهم البغي هم ينتصرون
And those who, when an oppressive wrong is inflicted on them, (are not cowed but) help and defend themselves.

وجزاء سيئة سيئة مثلها فمن عفا وأصلح فأجره على الله إنه لا يحب الظالمين
The recompense for an injury is an injury equal thereto (in degree): but if a person forgives and makes reconciliation, his reward is due from Allah: for (Allah) loveth not those who do wrong.

ولمن انتصر بعد ظلمه فأولئك ما عليهم من سبيل
But indeed if any do help and defend themselves after a wrong (done) to them, against such there is no cause of blame.

إنما السبيل على الذين يظلمون الناس ويبغون في الأرض بغير الحق أولئك لهم عذاب أليم
The blame is only against those who oppress men and wrong-doing and insolently transgress beyond bounds through the land, defying right and justice: for such there will be a penalty grievous.

ولمن صبر وغفر إن ذلك لمن عزم الأمور
But indeed if any show patience and forgive, that would truly be an exercise of courageous will and resolution in the conduct of affairs.

ومن يضلل الله فما له من ولي من بعده وترى الظالمين لما رأوا العذاب يقولون هل إلى مرد من سبيل
For any whom Allah leaves astray, there is no protector thereafter. And thou wilt see the Wrong-doers, when in sight of the Penalty, Say: "Is there any way (to effect) a return?"

وتراهم يعرضون عليها خاشعين من الذل ينظرون من طرف خفي وقال الذين آمنوا إن الخاسرين الذين خسروا أنفسهم وأهليهم يوم القيامة ألا إن الظالمين في عذاب مقيم
And thou wilt see them brought forward to the (Penalty), in a humble frame of mind because of (their) disgrace, (and) looking with a stealthy glance. And the Believers will say: "Those are indeed in loss, who have given to perdition their own selves and those belonging to them on the Day of Judgment. Behold! Truly the Wrong-doers are in a lasting Penalty!"

وما كان لهم من أولياء ينصرونهم من دون الله ومن يضلل الله فما له من سبيل
And no protectors have they to help them, other than Allah. And for any whom Allah leaves to stray, there is no way (to the Goal).

استجيبوا لربكم من قبل أن يأتي يوم لا مرد له من الله ما لكم من ملجإ يومئذ وما لكم من نكير
Hearken ye to your Lord, before there come a Day which there will be no putting back, because of (the Ordainment of) Allah! that Day there will be for you no place of refuge nor will there be for you any room for denial (of your sins)!

فإن أعرضوا فما أرسلناك عليهم حفيظا إن عليك إلا البلاغ وإنا إذا أذقنا الإنسان منا رحمة فرح بها وإن تصبهم سيئة بما قدمت أيديهم فإن الإنسان كفور
If then they run away, We have not sent thee as a guard over them. Thy duty is but to convey (the Message). And truly, when We give man a taste of a Mercy from Ourselves, he doth exult thereat, but when some ill happens to him, on account of the deeds which his hands have sent forth, truly then is man ungrateful!

لله ملك السماوات والأرض يخلق ما يشاء يهب لمن يشاء إناثا ويهب لمن يشاء الذكور
To Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. He creates what He wills (and plans). He bestows (children) male or female according to His Will (and Plan),

أو يزوجهم ذكرانا وإناثا ويجعل من يشاء عقيما إنه عليم قدير
Or He bestows both males and females, and He leaves barren whom He will: for He is full of Knowledge and Power.

وما كان لبشر أن يكلمه الله إلا وحيا أو من وراء حجاب أو يرسل رسولا فيوحي بإذنه ما يشاء إنه علي حكيم
It is not fitting for a man that Allah should speak to him except by inspiration, or from behind a veil, or by the sending of a messenger to reveal, with Allah's permission, what Allah wills: for He is Most High, Most Wise.

وكذلك أوحينا إليك روحا من أمرنا ما كنت تدري ما الكتاب ولا الإيمان ولكن جعلناه نورا نهدي به من نشاء من عبادنا وإنك لتهدي إلى صراط مستقيم
And thus have We, by Our Command, sent inspiration to thee: thou knewest not (before) what was Revelation, and what was Faith; but We have made the (Qur'an) a Light, wherewith We guide such of Our servants as We will; and verily thou dost guide (men) to the Straight Way,-

صراط الله الذي له ما في السماوات وما في الأرض ألا إلى الله تصير الأمور
The Way of Allah, to Whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on earth. Behold (how) all affairs tend towards Allah!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم حم
Ha-Mim

والكتاب المبين
By the Book that makes things clear,-

إنا جعلناه قرآنا عربيا لعلكم تعقلون
We have made it a Qur'an in Arabic, that ye may be able to understand (and learn wisdom).

وإنه في أم الكتاب لدينا لعلي حكيم
And verily, it is in the Mother of the Book, in Our Presence, high (in dignity), full of wisdom.

أفنضرب عنكم الذكر صفحا أن كنتم قوما مسرفين
Shall We then take away the Message from you and repel (you), for that ye are a people transgressing beyond bounds?

وكم أرسلنا من نبي في الأولين
But how many were the prophets We sent amongst the peoples of old?

وما يأتيهم من نبي إلا كانوا به يستهزئون
And never came there a prophet to them but they mocked him.

فأهلكنا أشد منهم بطشا ومضى مثل الأولين
So We destroyed (them)- stronger in power than these;- and (thus) has passed on the Parable of the peoples of old.

ولئن سألتهم من خلق السماوات والأرض ليقولن خلقهن العزيز العليم
If thou wert to question them, 'Who created the heavens and the earth?' They would be sure to reply, 'they were created by (Him), the Exalted in Power, Full of Knowledge';-

الذي جعل لكم الأرض مهدا وجعل لكم فيها سبلا لعلكم تهتدون
(Yea, the same that) has made for you the earth (like a carpet) spread out, and has made for you roads (and channels) therein, in order that ye may find guidance (on the way);

والذي نزل من السماء ماء بقدر فأنشرنا به بلدة ميتا كذلك تخرجون
That sends down (from time to time) rain from the sky in due measure;- and We raise to life therewith a land that is dead; even so will ye be raised (from the dead);-

والذي خلق الأزواج كلها وجعل لكم من الفلك والأنعام ما تركبون
That has created pairs in all things, and has made for you ships and cattle on which ye ride,

لتستووا على ظهوره ثم تذكروا نعمة ربكم إذا استويتم عليه وتقولوا سبحان الذي سخر لنا هذا وما كنا له مقرنين
In order that ye may sit firm and square on their backs, and when so seated, ye may celebrate the (kind) favour of your Lord, and say, "Glory to Him Who has subjected these to our (use), for we could never have accomplished this (by ourselves),

وإنا إلى ربنا لمنقلبون
"And to our Lord, surely, must we turn back!"

وجعلوا له من عباده جزءا إن الإنسان لكفور مبين
Yet they attribute to some of His servants a share with Him (in his godhead)! truly is man a blasphemous ingrate avowed!

أم اتخذ مما يخلق بنات وأصفاكم بالبنين
What! has He taken daughters out of what He himself creates, and granted to you sons for choice?

وإذا بشر أحدهم بما ضرب للرحمن مثلا ظل وجهه مسودا وهو كظيم
When news is brought to one of them of (the birth of) what he sets up as a likeness to (Allah) Most Gracious, his face darkens, and he is filled with inward grief!

أومن ينشأ في الحلية وهو في الخصام غير مبين
Is then one brought up among trinkets, and unable to give a clear account in a dispute (to be associated with Allah)?

وجعلوا الملائكة الذين هم عباد الرحمن إناثا أشهدوا خلقهم ستكتب شهادتهم ويسألون
And they make into females angels who themselves serve Allah. Did they witness their creation? Their evidence will be recorded, and they will be called to account!

وقالوا لو شاء الرحمن ما عبدناهم ما لهم بذلك من علم إن هم إلا يخرصون
("Ah!") they say, "If it had been the will of (Allah) Most Gracious, we should not have worshipped such (deities)!" Of that they have no knowledge! they do nothing but lie!

أم آتيناهم كتابا من قبله فهم به مستمسكون
What! have We given them a Book before this, to which they are holding fast?

بل قالوا إنا وجدنا آباءنا على أمة وإنا على آثارهم مهتدون
Nay! they say: "We found our fathers following a certain religion, and we do guide ourselves by their footsteps."

وكذلك ما أرسلنا من قبلك في قرية من نذير إلا قال مترفوها إنا وجدنا آباءنا على أمة وإنا على آثارهم مقتدون
Just in the same way, whenever We sent a Warner before thee to any people, the wealthy ones among them said: "We found our fathers following a certain religion, and we will certainly follow in their footsteps."

قال أولو جئتكم بأهدى مما وجدتم عليه آباءكم قالوا إنا بما أرسلتم به كافرون
He said: "What! Even if I brought you better guidance than that which ye found your fathers following?" They said: "For us, we deny that ye (prophets) are sent (on a mission at all)."

فانتقمنا منهم فانظر كيف كان عاقبة المكذبين
So We exacted retribution from them: now see what was the end of those who rejected (Truth)!

وإذ قال إبراهيم لأبيه وقومه إنني براء مما تعبدون
Behold! Abraham said to his father and his people: "I do indeed clear myself of what ye worship:

إلا الذي فطرني فإنه سيهدين
"(I worship) only Him Who made me, and He will certainly guide me."

وجعلها كلمة باقية في عقبه لعلهم يرجعون
And he left it as a Word to endure among those who came after him, that they may turn back (to Allah).

بل متعت هؤلاء وآباءهم حتى جاءهم الحق ورسول مبين
Yea, I have given the good things of this life to these (men) and their fathers, until the Truth has come to them, and a messenger making things clear.

ولما جاءهم الحق قالوا هذا سحر وإنا به كافرون
But when the Truth came to them, they said: "This is sorcery, and we do reject it."

وقالوا لولا نزل هذا القرآن على رجل من القريتين عظيم
Also, they say: "Why is not this Qur'an sent down to some leading man in either of the two (chief) cities?"

أهم يقسمون رحمت ربك نحن قسمنا بينهم معيشتهم في الحياة الدنيا ورفعنا بعضهم فوق بعض درجات ليتخذ بعضهم بعضا سخريا ورحمت ربك خير مما يجمعون
Is it they who would portion out the Mercy of thy Lord? It is We Who portion out between them their livelihood in the life of this world: and We raise some of them above others in ranks, so that some may command work from others. But the Mercy of thy Lord is better than the (wealth) which they amass.

ولولا أن يكون الناس أمة واحدة لجعلنا لمن يكفر بالرحمن لبيوتهم سقفا من فضة ومعارج عليها يظهرون
And were it not that (all) men might become of one (evil) way of life, We would provide, for everyone that blasphemes against (Allah) Most Gracious, silver roofs for their houses and (silver) stair-ways on which to go up,

ولبيوتهم أبوابا وسررا عليها يتكئون
And (silver) doors to their houses, and thrones (of silver) on which they could recline,

وزخرفا وإن كل ذلك لما متاع الحياة الدنيا والآخرة عند ربك للمتقين
And also adornments of gold. But all this were nothing but conveniences of the present life: The Hereafter, in the sight of thy Lord is for the Righteous.

ومن يعش عن ذكر الرحمن نقيض له شيطانا فهو له قرين
If anyone withdraws himself from remembrance of (Allah) Most Gracious, We appoint for him an evil one, to be an intimate companion to him.

وإنهم ليصدونهم عن السبيل ويحسبون أنهم مهتدون
Such (evil ones) really hinder them from the Path, but they think that they are being guided aright!

حتى إذا جاءنا قال يا ليت بيني وبينك بعد المشرقين فبئس القرين
At length, when (such a one) comes to Us, he says (to his evil companion): "Would that between me and thee were the distance of East and West!" Ah! evil is the companion (indeed)!

ولن ينفعكم اليوم إذ ظلمتم أنكم في العذاب مشتركون
When ye have done wrong, it will avail you nothing, that Day, that ye shall be partners in Punishment!

أفأنت تسمع الصم أو تهدي العمي ومن كان في ضلال مبين
Canst thou then make the deaf to hear, or give direction to the blind or to such as (wander) in manifest error?

فإما نذهبن بك فإنا منهم منتقمون
Even if We take thee away, We shall be sure to exact retribution from them,

أو نرينك الذي وعدناهم فإنا عليهم مقتدرون
Or We shall show thee that (accomplished) which We have promised them: for verily We shall prevail over them.

فاستمسك بالذي أوحي إليك إنك على صراط مستقيم
So hold thou fast to the Revelation sent down to thee; verily thou art on a Straight Way.

وإنه لذكر لك ولقومك وسوف تسألون
The (Qur'an) is indeed the message, for thee and for thy people; and soon shall ye (all) be brought to account.

واسأل من أرسلنا من قبلك من رسلنا أجعلنا من دون الرحمن آلهة يعبدون
And question thou our messengers whom We sent before thee; did We appoint any deities other than (Allah) Most Gracious, to be worshipped?

ولقد أرسلنا موسى بآياتنا إلى فرعون وملئه فقال إني رسول رب العالمين
We did send Moses aforetime, with Our Signs, to Pharaoh and his Chiefs: He said, "I am a messenger of the Lord of the Worlds."

فلما جاءهم بآياتنا إذا هم منها يضحكون
But when he came to them with Our Signs, behold they ridiculed them.

وما نريهم من آية إلا هي أكبر من أختها وأخذناهم بالعذاب لعلهم يرجعون
We showed them Sign after Sign, each greater than its fellow, and We seized them with Punishment, in order that they might turn (to Us).

وقالوا يا أيه الساحر ادع لنا ربك بما عهد عندك إننا لمهتدون
And they said, "O thou sorcerer! Invoke thy Lord for us according to His covenant with thee; for we shall truly accept guidance."

فلما كشفنا عنهم العذاب إذا هم ينكثون
But when We removed the Penalty from them, behold, they broke their word.

ونادى فرعون في قومه قال يا قوم أليس لي ملك مصر وهذه الأنهار تجري من تحتي أفلا تبصرون
And Pharaoh proclaimed among his people, saying: "O my people! Does not the dominion of Egypt belong to me, (witness) these streams flowing underneath my (palace)? What! see ye not then?

أم أنا خير من هذا الذي هو مهين ولا يكاد يبين
"Am I not better than this (Moses), who is a contemptible wretch and can scarcely express himself clearly?

فلولا ألقي عليه أسورة من ذهب أو جاء معه الملائكة مقترنين
"Then why are not gold bracelets bestowed on him, or (why) come (not) with him angels accompanying him in procession?"

فاستخف قومه فأطاعوه إنهم كانوا قوما فاسقين
Thus did he make fools of his people, and they obeyed him: truly were they a people rebellious (against Allah).

فلما آسفونا انتقمنا منهم فأغرقناهم أجمعين
When at length they provoked Us, We exacted retribution from them, and We drowned them all.

فجعلناهم سلفا ومثلا للآخرين
And We made them (a people) of the Past and an Example to later ages.

ولما ضرب ابن مريم مثلا إذا قومك منه يصدون
When (Jesus) the son of Mary is held up as an example, behold, thy people raise a clamour thereat (in ridicule)!

وقالوا أآلهتنا خير أم هو ما ضربوه لك إلا جدلا بل هم قوم خصمون
And they say, "Are our gods best, or he?" This they set forth to thee, only by way of disputation: yea, they are a contentious people.

إن هو إلا عبد أنعمنا عليه وجعلناه مثلا لبني إسرائيل
He was no more than a servant: We granted Our favour to him, and We made him an example to the Children of Israel.

ولو نشاء لجعلنا منكم ملائكة في الأرض يخلفون
And if it were Our Will, We could make angels from amongst you, succeeding each other on the earth.

وإنه لعلم للساعة فلا تمترن بها واتبعون هذا صراط مستقيم
And (Jesus) shall be a Sign (for the coming of) the Hour (of Judgment): therefore have no doubt about the (Hour), but follow ye Me: this is a Straight Way.

ولا يصدنكم الشيطان إنه لكم عدو مبين
Let not the Evil One hinder you: for he is to you an enemy avowed.

ولما جاء عيسى بالبينات قال قد جئتكم بالحكمة ولأبين لكم بعض الذي تختلفون فيه فاتقوا الله وأطيعون
When Jesus came with Clear Signs, he said: "Now have I come to you with Wisdom, and in order to make clear to you some of the (points) on which ye dispute: therefore fear Allah and obey me.

إن الله هو ربي وربكم فاعبدوه هذا صراط مستقيم
"For Allah, He is my Lord and your Lord: so worship ye Him: this is a Straight Way."

فاختلف الأحزاب من بينهم فويل للذين ظلموا من عذاب يوم أليم
But sects from among themselves fell into disagreement: then woe to the wrong-doers, from the Penalty of a Grievous Day!

هل ينظرون إلا الساعة أن تأتيهم بغتة وهم لا يشعرون
Do they only wait for the Hour - that it should come on them all of a sudden, while they perceive not?

الأخلاء يومئذ بعضهم لبعض عدو إلا المتقين
Friends on that day will be foes, one to another,- except the Righteous.

يا عباد لا خوف عليكم اليوم ولا أنتم تحزنون
My devotees! no fear shall be on you that Day, nor shall ye grieve,-

الذين آمنوا بآياتنا وكانوا مسلمين
(Being) those who have believed in Our Signs and bowed (their wills to Ours) in Islam.

ادخلوا الجنة أنتم وأزواجكم تحبرون
Enter ye the Garden, ye and your wives, in (beauty and) rejoicing.

يطاف عليهم بصحاف من ذهب وأكواب وفيها ما تشتهيه الأنفس وتلذ الأعين وأنتم فيها خالدون
To them will be passed round, dishes and goblets of gold: there will be there all that the souls could desire, all that their eyes could delight in: and ye shall abide therein (for eye).

وتلك الجنة التي أورثتموها بما كنتم تعملون
Such will be the Garden of which ye are made heirs for your (good) deeds (in life).

لكم فيها فاكهة كثيرة منها تأكلون
Ye shall have therein abundance of fruit, from which ye shall have satisfaction.

إن المجرمين في عذاب جهنم خالدون
The sinners will be in the Punishment of Hell, to dwell therein (for aye):

لا يفتر عنهم وهم فيه مبلسون
Nowise will the (Punishment) be lightened for them, and in despair will they be there overwhelmed.

وما ظلمناهم ولكن كانوا هم الظالمين
Nowise shall We be unjust to them: but it is they who have been unjust themselves.

ونادوا يا مالك ليقض علينا ربك قال إنكم ماكثون
They will cry: "O Malik! would that thy Lord put an end to us!" He will say, "Nay, but ye shall abide!"

لقد جئناكم بالحق ولكن أكثركم للحق كارهون
Verily We have brought the Truth to you: but most of you have a hatred for Truth.

أم أبرموا أمرا فإنا مبرمون
What! have they settled some plan (among themselves)? But it is We Who settle things.

أم يحسبون أنا لا نسمع سرهم ونجواهم بلى ورسلنا لديهم يكتبون
Or do they think that We hear not their secrets and their private counsels? Indeed (We do), and Our messengers are by them, to record.

قل إن كان للرحمن ولد فأنا أول العابدين
Say: "If (Allah) Most Gracious had a son, I would be the first to worship."

سبحان رب السماوات والأرض رب العرش عما يصفون
Glory to the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne (of Authority)! (He is free) from the things they attribute (to him)!

فذرهم يخوضوا ويلعبوا حتى يلاقوا يومهم الذي يوعدون
So leave them to babble and play (with vanities) until they meet that Day of theirs, which they have been promised.

وهو الذي في السماء إله وفي الأرض إله وهو الحكيم العليم
It is He Who is Allah in heaven and Allah on earth; and He is full of Wisdom and Knowledge.

وتبارك الذي له ملك السماوات والأرض وما بينهما وعنده علم الساعة وإليه ترجعون
And blessed is He to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and all between them: with Him is the Knowledge of the Hour (of Judgment): and to Him shall ye be brought back.

ولا يملك الذين يدعون من دونه الشفاعة إلا من شهد بالحق وهم يعلمون
And those whom they invoke besides Allah have no power of intercession;- only he who bears witness to the Truth, and they know (him).

ولئن سألتهم من خلقهم ليقولن الله فأنى يؤفكون
If thou ask them, who created them, they will certainly say, Allah: How then are they deluded away (from the Truth)?

وقيله يا رب إن هؤلاء قوم لا يؤمنون
(Allah has knowledge) of the (Prophet's) cry, "O my Lord! Truly these are people who will not believe!"

فاصفح عنهم وقل سلام فسوف يعلمون
But turn away from them, and say "Peace!" But soon shall they know!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم حم
Ha-Mim.

والكتاب المبين
By the Book that makes things clear;-

إنا أنزلناه في ليلة مباركة إنا كنا منذرين
We sent it down during a Blessed Night: for We (ever) wish to warn (against Evil).

فيها يفرق كل أمر حكيم
In the (Night) is made distinct every affair of wisdom,

أمرا من عندنا إنا كنا مرسلين
By command, from Our Presence. For We (ever) send (revelations),

رحمة من ربك إنه هو السميع العليم
As Mercy from thy Lord: for He hears and knows (all things);

رب السماوات والأرض وما بينهما إن كنتم موقنين
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all between them, if ye (but) have an assured faith.

لا إله إلا هو يحيي ويميت ربكم ورب آبائكم الأولين
There is no god but He: It is He Who gives life and gives death,- The Lord and Cherisher to you and your earliest ancestors.

بل هم في شك يلعبون
Yet they play about in doubt.

فارتقب يوم تأتي السماء بدخان مبين
Then watch thou for the Day that the sky will bring forth a kind of smoke (or mist) plainly visible,

يغشى الناس هذا عذاب أليم
Enveloping the people: this will be a Penalty Grievous.

ربنا اكشف عنا العذاب إنا مؤمنون
(They will say:) "Our Lord! remove the Penalty from us, for we do really believe!"

أنى لهم الذكرى وقد جاءهم رسول مبين
How shall the message be (effectual) for them, seeing that an Messenger explaining things clearly has (already) come to them,-

ثم تولوا عنه وقالوا معلم مجنون
Yet they turn away from him and say: "Tutored (by others), a man possessed!"

إنا كاشفو العذاب قليلا إنكم عائدون
We shall indeed remove the Penalty for a while, (but) truly ye will revert (to your ways).

يوم نبطش البطشة الكبرى إنا منتقمون
One day We shall seize you with a mighty onslaught: We will indeed (then) exact Retribution!

ولقد فتنا قبلهم قوم فرعون وجاءهم رسول كريم
We did, before them, try the people of Pharaoh: there came to them a messenger most honourable,

أن أدوا إلي عباد الله إني لكم رسول أمين
Saying: "Restore to me the Servants of Allah: I am to you an messenger worthy of all trust;

وأن لا تعلوا على الله إني آتيكم بسلطان مبين
"And be not arrogant as against Allah: for I come to you with authority manifest.

وإني عذت بربي وربكم أن ترجمون
"For me, I have sought safety with my Lord and your Lord, against your injuring me.

وإن لم تؤمنوا لي فاعتزلون
"If ye believe me not, at least keep yourselves away from me."

فدعا ربه أن هؤلاء قوم مجرمون
(But they were aggressive:) then he cried to his Lord: "These are indeed a people given to sin."

فأسر بعبادي ليلا إنكم متبعون
(The reply came:) "March forth with My Servants by night: for ye are sure to be pursued.

واترك البحر رهوا إنهم جند مغرقون
"And leave the sea as a furrow (divided): for they are a host (destined) to be drowned."

كم تركوا من جنات وعيون
How many were the gardens and springs they left behind,

وزروع ومقام كريم
And corn-fields and noble buildings,

ونعمة كانوا فيها فاكهين
And wealth (and conveniences of life), wherein they had taken such delight!

كذلك وأورثناها قوما آخرين
Thus (was their end)! And We made other people inherit (those things)!

فما بكت عليهم السماء والأرض وما كانوا منظرين
And neither heaven nor earth shed a tear over them: nor were they given a respite (again).

ولقد نجينا بني إسرائيل من العذاب المهين
We did deliver aforetime the Children of Israel from humiliating Punishment,

من فرعون إنه كان عاليا من المسرفين
Inflicted by Pharaoh, for he was arrogant (even) among inordinate transgressors.

ولقد اخترناهم على علم على العالمين
And We chose them aforetime above the nations, knowingly,

وآتيناهم من الآيات ما فيه بلاء مبين
And granted them Signs in which there was a manifest trial

إن هؤلاء ليقولون
As to these (Quraish), they say forsooth:

إن هي إلا موتتنا الأولى وما نحن بمنشرين
"There is nothing beyond our first death, and we shall not be raised again.

فأتوا بآبائنا إن كنتم صادقين
"Then bring (back) our forefathers, if what ye say is true!"

أهم خير أم قوم تبع والذين من قبلهم أهلكناهم إنهم كانوا مجرمين
What! Are they better than the people of Tubba and those who were before them? We destroyed them because they were guilty of sin.

وما خلقنا السماوات والأرض وما بينهما لاعبين
We created not the heavens, the earth, and all between them, merely in (idle) sport:

ما خلقناهما إلا بالحق ولكن أكثرهم لا يعلمون
We created them not except for just ends: but most of them do not understand.

إن يوم الفصل ميقاتهم أجمعين
Verily the Day of sorting out is the time appointed for all of them,-

يوم لا يغني مولى عن مولى شيئا ولا هم ينصرون
The Day when no protector can avail his client in aught, and no help can they receive,

إلا من رحم الله إنه هو العزيز الرحيم
Except such as receive Allah's Mercy: for He is Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.

إن شجرت الزقوم
Verily the tree of Zaqqum

طعام الأثيم
Will be the food of the Sinful,-

كالمهل يغلي في البطون
Like molten brass; it will boil in their insides.

كغلي الحميم
Like the boiling of scalding water.

خذوه فاعتلوه إلى سواء الجحيم
(A voice will cry: "Seize ye him and drag him into the midst of the Blazing Fire!

ثم صبوا فوق رأسه من عذاب الحميم
"Then pour over his head the Penalty of Boiling Water,

ذق إنك أنت العزيز الكريم
"Taste thou (this)! Truly wast thou mighty, full of honour!

إن هذا ما كنتم به تمترون
"Truly this is what ye used to doubt!"

إن المتقين في مقام أمين
As to the Righteous (they will be) in a position of Security,

في جنات وعيون
Among Gardens and Springs;

يلبسون من سندس وإستبرق متقابلين
Dressed in fine silk and in rich brocade, they will face each other;

كذلك وزوجناهم بحور عين
So; and We shall join them to fair women with beautiful, big, and lustrous eyes.

يدعون فيها بكل فاكهة آمنين
There can they call for every kind of fruit in peace and security;

لا يذوقون فيها الموت إلا الموتة الأولى ووقاهم عذاب الجحيم
Nor will they there taste Death, except the first death; and He will preserve them from the Penalty of the Blazing Fire,-

فضلا من ربك ذلك هو الفوز العظيم
As a Bounty from thy Lord! that will be the supreme achievement!

فإنما يسرناه بلسانك لعلهم يتذكرون
Verily, We have made this (Qur'an) easy, in thy tongue, in order that they may give heed.

فارتقب إنهم مرتقبون
So wait thou and watch; for they (too) are waiting.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم حم
Ha-Mim.

تنزيل الكتاب من الله العزيز الحكيم
The revelation of the Book is from Allah the Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom.

إن في السماوات والأرض لآيات للمؤمنين
Verily in the heavens and the earth, are Signs for those who believe.

وفي خلقكم وما يبث من دابة آيات لقوم يوقنون
And in the creation of yourselves and the fact that animals are scattered (through the earth), are Signs for those of assured Faith.

واختلاف الليل والنهار وما أنزل الله من السماء من رزق فأحيا به الأرض بعد موتها وتصريف الرياح آيات لقوم يعقلون
And in the alternation of Night and Day, and the fact that Allah sends down Sustenance from the sky, and revives therewith the earth after its death, and in the change of the winds,- are Signs for those that are wise.

تلك آيات الله نتلوها عليك بالحق فبأي حديث بعد الله وآياته يؤمنون
Such are the Signs of Allah, which We rehearse to thee in Truth; then in what exposition will they believe after (rejecting) Allah and His Signs?

ويل لكل أفاك أثيم
Woe to each sinful dealer in Falsehoods:

يسمع آيات الله تتلى عليه ثم يصر مستكبرا كأن لم يسمعها فبشره بعذاب أليم
He hears the Signs of Allah rehearsed to him, yet is obstinate and lofty, as if he had not heard them: then announce to him a Penalty Grievous!

وإذا علم من آياتنا شيئا اتخذها هزوا أولئك لهم عذاب مهين
And when he learns something of Our Signs, he takes them in jest: for such there will be a humiliating Penalty.

من ورائهم جهنم ولا يغني عنهم ما كسبوا شيئا ولا ما اتخذوا من دون الله أولياء ولهم عذاب عظيم
In front of them is Hell: and of no profit to them is anything they may have earned, nor any protectors they may have taken to themselves besides Allah: for them is a tremendous Penalty.

هذا هدى والذين كفروا بآيات ربهم لهم عذاب من رجز أليم
This is (true) Guidance and for those who reject the Signs of their Lord, is a grievous Penalty of abomination.

الله الذي سخر لكم البحر لتجري الفلك فيه بأمره ولتبتغوا من فضله ولعلكم تشكرون
It is Allah Who has subjected the sea to you, that ships may sail through it by His command, that ye may seek of his Bounty, and that ye may be grateful.

وسخر لكم ما في السماوات وما في الأرض جميعا منه إن في ذلك لآيات لقوم يتفكرون
And He has subjected to you, as from Him, all that is in the heavens and on earth: Behold, in that are Signs indeed for those who reflect.

قل للذين آمنوا يغفروا للذين لا يرجون أيام الله ليجزي قوما بما كانوا يكسبون
Tell those who believe, to forgive those who do not look forward to the Days of Allah: It is for Him to recompense (for good or ill) each People according to what they have earned.

من عمل صالحا فلنفسه ومن أساء فعليها ثم إلى ربكم ترجعون
If any one does a righteous deed, it ensures to the benefit of his own soul; if he does evil, it works against (his own soul). In the end will ye (all) be brought back to your Lord.

ولقد آتينا بني إسرائيل الكتاب والحكم والنبوة ورزقناهم من الطيبات وفضلناهم على العالمين
We did aforetime grant to the Children of Israel the Book the Power of Command, and Prophethood; We gave them, for Sustenance, things good and pure; and We favoured them above the nations.

وآتيناهم بينات من الأمر فما اختلفوا إلا من بعد ما جاءهم العلم بغيا بينهم إن ربك يقضي بينهم يوم القيامة فيما كانوا فيه يختلفون
And We granted them Clear Signs in affairs (of Religion): it was only after knowledge had been granted to them that they fell into schisms, through insolent envy among themselves. Verily thy Lord will judge between them on the Day of Judgment as to those matters in which they set up differences.

ثم جعلناك على شريعة من الأمر فاتبعها ولا تتبع أهواء الذين لا يعلمون
Then We put thee on the (right) Way of Religion: so follow thou that (Way), and follow not the desires of those who know not.

إنهم لن يغنوا عنك من الله شيئا وإن الظالمين بعضهم أولياء بعض والله ولي المتقين
They will be of no use to thee in the sight of Allah: it is only Wrong-doers (that stand as) protectors, one to another: but Allah is the Protector of the Righteous.

هذا بصائر للناس وهدى ورحمة لقوم يوقنون
These are clear evidences to men and a Guidance and Mercy to those of assured Faith.

أم حسب الذين اجترحوا السيئات أن نجعلهم كالذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات سواء محياهم ومماتهم ساء ما يحكمون
What! Do those who seek after evil ways think that We shall hold them equal with those who believe and do righteous deeds,- that equal will be their life and their death? Ill is the judgment that they make.

وخلق الله السماوات والأرض بالحق ولتجزى كل نفس بما كسبت وهم لا يظلمون
Allah created the heavens and the earth for just ends, and in order that each soul may find the recompense of what it has earned, and none of them be wronged.

أفرأيت من اتخذ إلهه هواه وأضله الله على علم وختم على سمعه وقلبه وجعل على بصره غشاوة فمن يهديه من بعد الله أفلا تذكرون
Then seest thou such a one as takes as his god his own vain desire? Allah has, knowing (him as such), left him astray, and sealed his hearing and his heart (and understanding), and put a cover on his sight. Who, then, will guide him after Allah (has withdrawn Guidance)? Will ye not then receive admonition?

وقالوا ما هي إلا حياتنا الدنيا نموت ونحيا وما يهلكنا إلا الدهر وما لهم بذلك من علم إن هم إلا يظنون
And they say: "What is there but our life in this world? We shall die and we live, and nothing but time can destroy us." But of that they have no knowledge: they merely conjecture:

وإذا تتلى عليهم آياتنا بينات ما كان حجتهم إلا أن قالوا ائتوا بآبائنا إن كنتم صادقين
And when Our Clear Signs are rehearsed to them their argument is nothing but this: They say, "Bring (back) our forefathers, if what ye say is true!"

قل الله يحييكم ثم يميتكم ثم يجمعكم إلى يوم القيامة لا ريب فيه ولكن أكثر الناس لا يعلمون
Say: "It is Allah Who gives you life, then gives you death; then He will gather you together for the Day of Judgment about which there is no doubt": But most men do not understand.

ولله ملك السماوات والأرض ويوم تقوم الساعة يومئذ يخسر المبطلون
To Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and the Day that the Hour of Judgment is established,- that Day will the dealers in Falsehood perish!

وترى كل أمة جاثية كل أمة تدعى إلى كتابها اليوم تجزون ما كنتم تعملون
And thou wilt see every sect bowing the knee: Every sect will be called to its Record: "This Day shall ye be recompensed for all that ye did!

هذا كتابنا ينطق عليكم بالحق إنا كنا نستنسخ ما كنتم تعملون
"This Our Record speaks about you with truth: For We were wont to put on Record all that ye did."

فأما الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات فيدخلهم ربهم في رحمته ذلك هو الفوز المبين
Then, as to those who believed and did righteous deeds, their Lord will admit them to His Mercy that will be the achievement for all to see.

وأما الذين كفروا أفلم تكن آياتي تتلى عليكم فاستكبرتم وكنتم قوما مجرمين
But as to those who rejected Allah, (to them will be said): "Were not Our Signs rehearsed to you? But ye were arrogant, and were a people given to sin!

وإذا قيل إن وعد الله حق والساعة لا ريب فيها قلتم ما ندري ما الساعة إن نظن إلا ظنا وما نحن بمستيقنين
"And when it was said that the promise of Allah was true, and that the Hour- there was no doubt about its (coming), ye used to say, 'We know not what is the hour: we only think it is an idea, and we have no firm assurance.'"

وبدا لهم سيئات ما عملوا وحاق بهم ما كانوا به يستهزئون
Then will appear to them the evil (fruits) of what they did, and they will be completely encircled by that which they used to mock at!

وقيل اليوم ننساكم كما نسيتم لقاء يومكم هذا ومأواكم النار وما لكم من ناصرين
It will also be said: "This Day We will forget you as ye forgot the meeting of this Day of yours! and your abode is the Fire, and no helpers have ye!

ذلكم بأنكم اتخذتم آيات الله هزوا وغرتكم الحياة الدنيا فاليوم لا يخرجون منها ولا هم يستعتبون
"This, because ye used to take the Signs of Allah in jest, and the life of the world deceived you:" (From) that Day, therefore, they shall not be taken out thence, nor shall they be received into Grace.

فلله الحمد رب السماوات ورب الأرض رب العالمين
Then Praise be to Allah, Lord of the heavens and Lord of the earth,- Lord and Cherisher of all the Worlds!

وله الكبرياء في السماوات والأرض وهو العزيز الحكيم
To Him be glory throughout the heavens and the earth: and He is Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم حم
Ha-Mim.

تنزيل الكتاب من الله العزيز الحكيم
The Revelation of the Book is from Allah the Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom.

ما خلقنا السماوات والأرض وما بينهما إلا بالحق وأجل مسمى والذين كفروا عما أنذروا معرضون
We created not the heavens and the earth and all between them but for just ends, and for a Term Appointed: But those who reject Faith turn away from that whereof they are warned.

قل أرأيتم ما تدعون من دون الله أروني ماذا خلقوا من الأرض أم لهم شرك في السماوات ائتوني بكتاب من قبل هذا أو أثارة من علم إن كنتم صادقين
Say: "Do ye see what it is ye invoke besides Allah? Show me what it is they have created on earth, or have they a share in the heavens bring me a book (revealed) before this, or any remnant of knowledge (ye may have), if ye are telling the truth!

ومن أضل ممن يدعو من دون الله من لا يستجيب له إلى يوم القيامة وهم عن دعائهم غافلون
And who is more astray than one who invokes besides Allah, such as will not answer him to the Day of Judgment, and who (in fact) are unconscious of their call (to them)?

وإذا حشر الناس كانوا لهم أعداء وكانوا بعبادتهم كافرين
And when mankind are gathered together (at the Resurrection), they will be hostile to them and reject their worship (altogether)!

وإذا تتلى عليهم آياتنا بينات قال الذين كفروا للحق لما جاءهم هذا سحر مبين
When Our Clear Signs are rehearsed to them, the Unbelievers say, of the Truth when it comes to them: "This is evident sorcery!"

أم يقولون افتراه قل إن افتريته فلا تملكون لي من الله شيئا هو أعلم بما تفيضون فيه كفى به شهيدا بيني وبينكم وهو الغفور الرحيم
Or do they say, "He has forged it"? Say: "Had I forged it, then can ye obtain no single (blessing) for me from Allah. He knows best of that whereof ye talk (so glibly)! Enough is He for a witness between me and you! And he is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

قل ما كنت بدعا من الرسل وما أدري ما يفعل بي ولا بكم إن أتبع إلا ما يوحى إلي وما أنا إلا نذير مبين
Say: "I am no bringer of new-fangled doctrine among the messengers, nor do I know what will be done with me or with you. I follow but that which is revealed to me by inspiration; I am but a Warner open and clear."

قل أرأيتم إن كان من عند الله وكفرتم به وشهد شاهد من بني إسرائيل على مثله فآمن واستكبرتم إن الله لا يهدي القوم الظالمين
Say: "See ye? If (this teaching) be from Allah, and ye reject it, and a witness from among the Children of Israel testifies to its similarity (with earlier scripture), and has believed while ye are arrogant, (how unjust ye are!) truly, Allah guides not a people unjust."

وقال الذين كفروا للذين آمنوا لو كان خيرا ما سبقونا إليه وإذ لم يهتدوا به فسيقولون هذا إفك قديم
The Unbelievers say of those who believe: "If (this Message) were a good thing, (such men) would not have gone to it first, before us!" And seeing that they guide not themselves thereby, they will say, "this is an (old,) falsehood!"

ومن قبله كتاب موسى إماما ورحمة وهذا كتاب مصدق لسانا عربيا لينذر الذين ظلموا وبشرى للمحسنين
And before this, was the Book of Moses as a guide and a mercy: And this Book confirms (it) in the Arabic tongue; to admonish the unjust, and as Glad Tidings to those who do right.

إن الذين قالوا ربنا الله ثم استقاموا فلا خوف عليهم ولا هم يحزنون
Verily those who say, "Our Lord is Allah," and remain firm (on that Path),- on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.

أولئك أصحاب الجنة خالدين فيها جزاء بما كانوا يعملون
Such shall be Companions of the Gardens, dwelling therein (for aye): a recompense for their (good) deeds.

ووصينا الإنسان بوالديه إحسانا حملته أمه كرها ووضعته كرها وحمله وفصاله ثلاثون شهرا حتى إذا بلغ أشده وبلغ أربعين سنة قال رب أوزعني أن أشكر نعمتك التي أنعمت علي وعلى والدي وأن أعمل صالحا ترضاه وأصلح لي في ذريتي إني تبت إليك وإني من المسلمين
We have enjoined on man kindness to his parents: In pain did his mother bear him, and in pain did she give him birth. The carrying of the (child) to his weaning is (a period of) thirty months. At length, when he reaches the age of full strength and attains forty years, he says, "O my Lord! Grant me that I may be grateful for Thy favour which Thou has bestowed upon me, and upon both my parents, and that I may work righteousness such as Thou mayest approve; and be gracious to me in my issue. Truly have I turned to Thee and truly do I bow (to Thee) in Islam."

أولئك الذين نتقبل عنهم أحسن ما عملوا ونتجاوز عن سيئاتهم في أصحاب الجنة وعد الصدق الذي كانوا يوعدون
Such are they from whom We shall accept the best of their deeds and pass by their ill deeds: (They shall be) among the Companions of the Garden: a promise! of truth, which was made to them (in this life).

والذي قال لوالديه أف لكما أتعدانني أن أخرج وقد خلت القرون من قبلي وهما يستغيثان الله ويلك آمن إن وعد الله حق فيقول ما هذا إلا أساطير الأولين
But (there is one) who says to his parents, "Fie on you! Do ye hold out the promise to me that I shall be raised up, even though generations have passed before me (without rising again)?" And they two seek Allah's aid, (and rebuke the son): "Woe to thee! Have faith! for the promise of Allah is true." But he says, "This is nothing but tales of the ancients!"

أولئك الذين حق عليهم القول في أمم قد خلت من قبلهم من الجن والإنس إنهم كانوا خاسرين
Such are they against whom is proved the sentence among the previous generations of Jinns and men, that have passed away; for they will be (utterly) lost.

ولكل درجات مما عملوا وليوفيهم أعمالهم وهم لا يظلمون
And to all are (assigned) degrees according to the deeds which they (have done), and in order that (Allah) may recompense their deeds, and no injustice be done to them.

ويوم يعرض الذين كفروا على النار أذهبتم طيباتكم في حياتكم الدنيا واستمتعتم بها فاليوم تجزون عذاب الهون بما كنتم تستكبرون في الأرض بغير الحق وبما كنتم تفسقون
And on the Day that the Unbelievers will be placed before the Fire, (It will be said to them): "Ye received your good things in the life of the world, and ye took your pleasure out of them: but today shall ye be recompensed with a Penalty of humiliation: for that ye were arrogant on earth without just cause, and that ye (ever) transgressed."

واذكر أخا عاد إذ أنذر قومه بالأحقاف وقد خلت النذر من بين يديه ومن خلفه ألا تعبدوا إلا الله إني أخاف عليكم عذاب يوم عظيم
Mention (Hud) one of 'Ad's (own) brethren: Behold, he warned his people about the winding Sand-tracts: but there have been warners before him and after him: "Worship ye none other than Allah: Truly I fear for you the Penalty of a Mighty Day."

قالوا أجئتنا لتأفكنا عن آلهتنا فأتنا بما تعدنا إن كنت من الصادقين
They said: "Hast thou come in order to turn us aside from our gods? Then bring upon us the (calamity) with which thou dost threaten us, if thou art telling the truth?"

قال إنما العلم عند الله وأبلغكم ما أرسلت به ولكني أراكم قوما تجهلون
He said: "The Knowledge (of when it will come) is only with Allah: I proclaim to you the mission on which I have been sent: But I see that ye are a people in ignorance!"..

فلما رأوه عارضا مستقبل أوديتهم قالوا هذا عارض ممطرنا بل هو ما استعجلتم به ريح فيها عذاب أليم
Then, when they saw the (Penalty in the shape of) a cloud traversing the sky, coming to meet their valleys, they said, "This cloud will give us rain!" "Nay, it is the (Calamity) ye were asking to be hastened!- A wind wherein is a Grievous Penalty!

تدمر كل شيء بأمر ربها فأصبحوا لا يرى إلا مساكنهم كذلك نجزي القوم المجرمين
"Everything will it destroy by the command of its Lord!" Then by the morning they - nothing was to be seen but (the ruins of) their houses! thus do We recompense those given to sin!

ولقد مكناهم فيما إن مكناكم فيه وجعلنا لهم سمعا وأبصارا وأفئدة فما أغنى عنهم سمعهم ولا أبصارهم ولا أفئدتهم من شيء إذ كانوا يجحدون بآيات الله وحاق بهم ما كانوا به يستهزئون
And We had firmly established them in a (prosperity and) power which We have not given to you (ye Quraish!) and We had endowed them with (faculties of) hearing, seeing, heart and intellect: but of no profit to them were their (faculties of) hearing, sight, and heart and intellect, when they went on rejecting the Signs of Allah; and they were (completely) encircled by that which they used to mock at!

ولقد أهلكنا ما حولكم من القرى وصرفنا الآيات لعلهم يرجعون
We destroyed aforetime populations round about you; and We have shown the Signs in various ways, that they may turn (to Us).

فلولا نصرهم الذين اتخذوا من دون الله قربانا آلهة بل ضلوا عنهم وذلك إفكهم وما كانوا يفترون
Why then was no help forthcoming to them from those whom they worshipped as gods, besides Allah, as a means of access (to Allah)? Nay, they left them in the lurch: but that was their falsehood and their invention.

وإذ صرفنا إليك نفرا من الجن يستمعون القرآن فلما حضروه قالوا أنصتوا فلما قضي ولوا إلى قومهم منذرين
Behold, We turned towards thee a company of Jinns (quietly) listening to the Qur'an: when they stood in the presence thereof, they said, "Listen in silence!" When the (reading) was finished, they returned to their people, to warn (them of their sins).

قالوا يا قومنا إنا سمعنا كتابا أنزل من بعد موسى مصدقا لما بين يديه يهدي إلى الحق وإلى طريق مستقيم
They said, "O our people! We have heard a Book revealed after Moses, confirming what came before it: it guides (men) to the Truth and to a Straight Path.

يا قومنا أجيبوا داعي الله وآمنوا به يغفر لكم من ذنوبكم ويجركم من عذاب أليم
"O our people, hearken to the one who invites (you) to Allah, and believe in him: He will forgive you your faults, and deliver you from a Penalty Grievous.

ومن لا يجب داعي الله فليس بمعجز في الأرض وليس له من دونه أولياء أولئك في ضلال مبين
"If any does not hearken to the one who invites (us) to Allah, he cannot frustrate (Allah's Plan) on earth, and no protectors can he have besides Allah: such men (wander) in manifest error."

أولم يروا أن الله الذي خلق السماوات والأرض ولم يعي بخلقهن بقادر على أن يحيي الموتى بلى إنه على كل شيء قدير
See they not that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, and never wearied with their creation, is able to give life to the dead? Yea, verily He has power over all things.

ويوم يعرض الذين كفروا على النار أليس هذا بالحق قالوا بلى وربنا قال فذوقوا العذاب بما كنتم تكفرون
And on the Day that the Unbelievers will be placed before the Fire, (they will be asked,) "Is this not the Truth?" they will say, "Yea, by our Lord!" (One will say:) "Then taste ye the Penalty, for that ye were wont to deny (Truth)!"

فاصبر كما صبر أولو العزم من الرسل ولا تستعجل لهم كأنهم يوم يرون ما يوعدون لم يلبثوا إلا ساعة من نهار بلاغ فهل يهلك إلا القوم الفاسقون
Therefore patiently persevere, as did (all) messengers of inflexible purpose; and be in no haste about the (Unbelievers). On the Day that they see the (Punishment) promised them, (it will be) as if they had not tarried more than an hour in a single day. (Thine but) to proclaim the Message: but shall any be destroyed except those who transgress?

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الذين كفروا وصدوا عن سبيل الله أضل أعمالهم
Those who reject Allah and hinder (men) from the Path of Allah,- their deeds will Allah render astray (from their mark).

والذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات وآمنوا بما نزل على محمد وهو الحق من ربهم كفر عنهم سيئاتهم وأصلح بالهم
But those who believe and work deeds of righteousness, and believe in the (Revelation) sent down to Muhammad - for it is the Truth from their Lord,- He will remove from them their ills and improve their condition.

ذلك بأن الذين كفروا اتبعوا الباطل وأن الذين آمنوا اتبعوا الحق من ربهم كذلك يضرب الله للناس أمثالهم
This because those who reject Allah follow vanities, while those who believe follow the Truth from their Lord: Thus does Allah set forth for men their lessons by similitudes.

فإذا لقيتم الذين كفروا فضرب الرقاب حتى إذا أثخنتموهم فشدوا الوثاق فإما منا بعد وإما فداء حتى تضع الحرب أوزارها ذلك ولو يشاء الله لانتصر منهم ولكن ليبلو بعضكم ببعض والذين قتلوا في سبيل الله فلن يضل أعمالهم
Therefore, when ye meet the Unbelievers (in fight), smite at their necks; At length, when ye have thoroughly subdued them, bind a bond firmly (on them): thereafter (is the time for) either generosity or ransom: Until the war lays down its burdens. Thus (are ye commanded): but if it had been Allah's Will, He could certainly have exacted retribution from them (Himself); but (He lets you fight) in order to test you, some with others. But those who are slain in the Way of Allah,- He will never let their deeds be lost.

سيهديهم ويصلح بالهم
Soon will He guide them and improve their condition,

ويدخلهم الجنة عرفها لهم
And admit them to the Garden which He has announced for them.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إن تنصروا الله ينصركم ويثبت أقدامكم
O ye who believe! If ye will aid (the cause of) Allah, He will aid you, and plant your feet firmly.

والذين كفروا فتعسا لهم وأضل أعمالهم
But those who reject (Allah),- for them is destruction, and (Allah) will render their deeds astray (from their mark).

ذلك بأنهم كرهوا ما أنزل الله فأحبط أعمالهم
That is because they hate the Revelation of Allah; so He has made their deeds fruitless.

أفلم يسيروا في الأرض فينظروا كيف كان عاقبة الذين من قبلهم دمر الله عليهم وللكافرين أمثالها
Do they not travel through the earth, and see what was the End of those before them (who did evil)? Allah brought utter destruction on them, and similar (fates await) those who reject Allah.

ذلك بأن الله مولى الذين آمنوا وأن الكافرين لا مولى لهم
That is because Allah is the Protector of those who believe, but those who reject Allah have no protector.

إن الله يدخل الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار والذين كفروا يتمتعون ويأكلون كما تأكل الأنعام والنار مثوى لهم
Verily Allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds, to Gardens beneath which rivers flow; while those who reject Allah will enjoy (this world) and eat as cattle eat; and the Fire will be their abode.

وكأين من قرية هي أشد قوة من قريتك التي أخرجتك أهلكناهم فلا ناصر لهم
And how many cities, with more power than thy city which has driven thee out, have We destroyed (for their sins)? and there was none to aid them.

أفمن كان على بينة من ربه كمن زين له سوء عمله واتبعوا أهواءهم
Is then one who is on a clear (Path) from his Lord, no better than one to whom the evil of his conduct seems pleasing, and such as follow their own lusts?

مثل الجنة التي وعد المتقون فيها أنهار من ماء غير آسن وأنهار من لبن لم يتغير طعمه وأنهار من خمر لذة للشاربين وأنهار من عسل مصفى ولهم فيها من كل الثمرات ومغفرة من ربهم كمن هو خالد في النار وسقوا ماء حميما فقطع أمعاءهم
(Here is) a Parable of the Garden which the righteous are promised: in it are rivers of water incorruptible; rivers of milk of which the taste never changes; rivers of wine, a joy to those who drink; and rivers of honey pure and clear. In it there are for them all kinds of fruits; and Grace from their Lord. (Can those in such Bliss) be compared to such as shall dwell for ever in the Fire, and be given, to drink, boiling water, so that it cuts up their bowels (to pieces)?

ومنهم من يستمع إليك حتى إذا خرجوا من عندك قالوا للذين أوتوا العلم ماذا قال آنفا أولئك الذين طبع الله على قلوبهم واتبعوا أهواءهم
And among them are men who listen to thee, but in the end, when they go out from thee, they say to those who have received Knowledge, "What is it he said just then?" Such are men whose hearts Allah has sealed, and who follow their own lusts.

والذين اهتدوا زادهم هدى وآتاهم تقواهم
But to those who receive Guidance, He increases the (light of) Guidance, and bestows on them their Piety and Restraint (from evil).

فهل ينظرون إلا الساعة أن تأتيهم بغتة فقد جاء أشراطها فأنى لهم إذا جاءتهم ذكراهم
Do they then only wait for the Hour,- that it should come on them of a sudden? But already have come some tokens thereof, and when it (actually) is on them, how can they benefit then by their admonition?

فاعلم أنه لا إله إلا الله واستغفر لذنبك وللمؤمنين والمؤمنات والله يعلم متقلبكم ومثواكم
Know, therefore, that there is no god but Allah, and ask forgiveness for thy fault, and for the men and women who believe: for Allah knows how ye move about and how ye dwell in your homes.

ويقول الذين آمنوا لولا نزلت سورة فإذا أنزلت سورة محكمة وذكر فيها القتال رأيت الذين في قلوبهم مرض ينظرون إليك نظر المغشي عليه من الموت فأولى لهم
Those who believe say, "Why is not a sura sent down (for us)?" But when a sura of basic or categorical meaning is revealed, and fighting is mentioned therein, thou wilt see those in whose hearts is a disease looking at thee with a look of one in swoon at the approach of death. But more fitting for them-

طاعة وقول معروف فإذا عزم الأمر فلو صدقوا الله لكان خيرا لهم
Were it to obey and say what is just, and when a matter is resolved on, it were best for them if they were true to Allah.

فهل عسيتم إن توليتم أن تفسدوا في الأرض وتقطعوا أرحامكم
Then, is it to be expected of you, if ye were put in authority, that ye will do mischief in the land, and break your ties of kith and kin?

أولئك الذين لعنهم الله فأصمهم وأعمى أبصارهم
Such are the men whom Allah has cursed for He has made them deaf and blinded their sight.

أفلا يتدبرون القرآن أم على قلوب أقفالها
Do they not then earnestly seek to understand the Qur'an, or are their hearts locked up by them?

إن الذين ارتدوا على أدبارهم من بعد ما تبين لهم الهدى الشيطان سول لهم وأملى لهم
Those who turn back as apostates after Guidance was clearly shown to them,- the Evil One has instigated them and busied them up with false hopes.

ذلك بأنهم قالوا للذين كرهوا ما نزل الله سنطيعكم في بعض الأمر والله يعلم إسرارهم
This, because they said to those who hate what Allah has revealed, "We will obey you in part of (this) matter"; but Allah knows their (inner) secrets.

فكيف إذا توفتهم الملائكة يضربون وجوههم وأدبارهم
But how (will it be) when the angels take their souls at death, and smite their faces and their backs?

ذلك بأنهم اتبعوا ما أسخط الله وكرهوا رضوانه فأحبط أعمالهم
This because they followed that which called forth the Wrath of Allah, and they hated Allah's good pleasure; so He made their deeds of no effect.

أم حسب الذين في قلوبهم مرض أن لن يخرج الله أضغانهم
Or do those in whose hearts is a disease, think that Allah will not bring to light all their rancour?

ولو نشاء لأريناكهم فلعرفتهم بسيماهم ولتعرفنهم في لحن القول والله يعلم أعمالكم
Had We so wiled, We could have shown them up to thee, and thou shouldst have known them by their marks: but surely thou wilt know them by the tone of their speech! And Allah knows all that ye do.

ولنبلونكم حتى نعلم المجاهدين منكم والصابرين ونبلو أخباركم
And We shall try you until We test those among you who strive their utmost and persevere in patience; and We shall try your reported (mettle).

إن الذين كفروا وصدوا عن سبيل الله وشاقوا الرسول من بعد ما تبين لهم الهدى لن يضروا الله شيئا وسيحبط أعمالهم
Those who reject Allah, hinder (men) from the Path of Allah, and resist the Messenger, after Guidance has been clearly shown to them, will not injure Allah in the least, but He will make their deeds of no effect.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا أطيعوا الله وأطيعوا الرسول ولا تبطلوا أعمالكم
O ye who believe! Obey Allah, and obey the messenger, and make not vain your deeds!

إن الذين كفروا وصدوا عن سبيل الله ثم ماتوا وهم كفار فلن يغفر الله لهم
Those who reject Allah, and hinder (men) from the Path of Allah, then die rejecting Allah,- Allah will not forgive them.

فلا تهنوا وتدعوا إلى السلم وأنتم الأعلون والله معكم ولن يتركم أعمالكم
Be not weary and faint-hearted, crying for peace, when ye should be uppermost: for Allah is with you, and will never put you in loss for your (good) deeds.

إنما الحياة الدنيا لعب ولهو وإن تؤمنوا وتتقوا يؤتكم أجوركم ولا يسألكم أموالكم
The life of this world is but play and amusement: and if ye believe and guard against Evil, He will grant you your recompense, and will not ask you (to give up) your possessions.

إن يسألكموها فيحفكم تبخلوا ويخرج أضغانكم
If He were to ask you for all of them, and press you, ye would covetously withhold, and He would bring out all your ill-feeling.

ها أنتم هؤلاء تدعون لتنفقوا في سبيل الله فمنكم من يبخل ومن يبخل فإنما يبخل عن نفسه والله الغني وأنتم الفقراء وإن تتولوا يستبدل قوما غيركم ثم لا يكونوا أمثالكم
Behold, ye are those invited to spend (of your substance) in the Way of Allah: But among you are some that are niggardly. But any who are niggardly are so at the expense of their own souls. But Allah is free of all wants, and it is ye that are needy. If ye turn back (from the Path), He will substitute in your stead another people; then they would not be like you!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم إنا فتحنا لك فتحا مبينا
Verily We have granted thee a manifest Victory:

ليغفر لك الله ما تقدم من ذنبك وما تأخر ويتم نعمته عليك ويهديك صراطا مستقيما
That Allah may forgive thee thy faults of the past and those to follow; fulfil His favour to thee; and guide thee on the Straight Way;

وينصرك الله نصرا عزيزا
And that Allah may help thee with powerful help.

هو الذي أنزل السكينة في قلوب المؤمنين ليزدادوا إيمانا مع إيمانهم ولله جنود السماوات والأرض وكان الله عليما حكيما
It is He Who sent down tranquillity into the hearts of the Believers, that they may add faith to their faith;- for to Allah belong the Forces of the heavens and the earth; and Allah is Full of Knowledge and Wisdom;-

ليدخل المؤمنين والمؤمنات جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها ويكفر عنهم سيئاتهم وكان ذلك عند الله فوزا عظيما
That He may admit the men and women who believe, to Gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for aye, and remove their ills from them;- and that is, in the sight of Allah, the highest achievement (for man),-

ويعذب المنافقين والمنافقات والمشركين والمشركات الظانين بالله ظن السوء عليهم دائرة السوء وغضب الله عليهم ولعنهم وأعد لهم جهنم وساءت مصيرا
And that He may punish the Hypocrites, men and women, and the Polytheists men and women, who imagine an evil opinion of Allah. On them is a round of Evil: the Wrath of Allah is on them: He has cursed them and got Hell ready for them: and evil is it for a destination.

ولله جنود السماوات والأرض وكان الله عزيزا حكيما
For to Allah belong the Forces of the heavens and the earth; and Allah is Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom.

إنا أرسلناك شاهدا ومبشرا ونذيرا
We have truly sent thee as a witness, as a bringer of Glad Tidings, and as a Warner:

لتؤمنوا بالله ورسوله وتعزروه وتوقروه وتسبحوه بكرة وأصيلا
In order that ye (O men) may believe in Allah and His Messenger, that ye may assist and honour Him, and celebrate His praise morning and evening.

إن الذين يبايعونك إنما يبايعون الله يد الله فوق أيديهم فمن نكث فإنما ينكث على نفسه ومن أوفى بما عاهد عليه الله فسيؤتيه أجرا عظيما
Verily those who plight their fealty to thee do no less than plight their fealty to Allah: the Hand of Allah is over their hands: then any one who violates his oath, does so to the harm of his own soul, and any one who fulfils what he has covenanted with Allah,- Allah will soon grant him a great Reward.

سيقول لك المخلفون من الأعراب شغلتنا أموالنا وأهلونا فاستغفر لنا يقولون بألسنتهم ما ليس في قلوبهم قل فمن يملك لكم من الله شيئا إن أراد بكم ضرا أو أراد بكم نفعا بل كان الله بما تعملون خبيرا
The desert Arabs who lagged behind will say to thee: "We were engaged in (looking after) our flocks and herds, and our families: do thou then ask forgiveness for us." They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say: "Who then has any power at all (to intervene) on your behalf with Allah, if His Will is to give you some loss or to give you some profit? But Allah is well acquainted with all that ye do.

بل ظننتم أن لن ينقلب الرسول والمؤمنون إلى أهليهم أبدا وزين ذلك في قلوبكم وظننتم ظن السوء وكنتم قوما بورا
"Nay, ye thought that the Messenger and the Believers would never return to their families; this seemed pleasing in your hearts, and ye conceived an evil thought, for ye are a people lost (in wickedness)."

ومن لم يؤمن بالله ورسوله فإنا أعتدنا للكافرين سعيرا
And if any believe not in Allah and His Messenger, We have prepared, for those who reject Allah, a Blazing Fire!

ولله ملك السماوات والأرض يغفر لمن يشاء ويعذب من يشاء وكان الله غفورا رحيما
To Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth: He forgives whom He wills, and He punishes whom He wills: but Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

سيقول المخلفون إذا انطلقتم إلى مغانم لتأخذوها ذرونا نتبعكم يريدون أن يبدلوا كلام الله قل لن تتبعونا كذلكم قال الله من قبل فسيقولون بل تحسدوننا بل كانوا لا يفقهون إلا قليلا
Those who lagged behind (will say), when ye (are free to) march and take booty (in war): "Permit us to follow you." They wish to change Allah's decree: Say: "Not thus will ye follow us: Allah has already declared (this) beforehand": then they will say, "But ye are jealous of us." Nay, but little do they understand (such things).

قل للمخلفين من الأعراب ستدعون إلى قوم أولي بأس شديد تقاتلونهم أو يسلمون فإن تطيعوا يؤتكم الله أجرا حسنا وإن تتولوا كما توليتم من قبل يعذبكم عذابا أليما
Say to the desert Arabs who lagged behind: "Ye shall be summoned (to fight) against a people given to vehement war: then shall ye fight, or they shall submit. Then if ye show obedience, Allah will grant you a goodly reward, but if ye turn back as ye did before, He will punish you with a grievous Penalty."

ليس على الأعمى حرج ولا على الأعرج حرج ولا على المريض حرج ومن يطع الله ورسوله يدخله جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار ومن يتول يعذبه عذابا أليما
No blame is there on the blind, nor is there blame on the lame, nor on one ill (if he joins not the war): But he that obeys Allah and his Messenger,- (Allah) will admit him to Gardens beneath which rivers flow; and he who turns back, (Allah) will punish him with a grievous Penalty.

لقد رضي الله عن المؤمنين إذ يبايعونك تحت الشجرة فعلم ما في قلوبهم فأنزل السكينة عليهم وأثابهم فتحا قريبا
Allah's Good Pleasure was on the Believers when they swore Fealty to thee under the Tree: He knew what was in their hearts, and He sent down Tranquillity to them; and He rewarded them with a speedy Victory;

ومغانم كثيرة يأخذونها وكان الله عزيزا حكيما
And many gains will they acquire (besides): and Allah is Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom.

وعدكم الله مغانم كثيرة تأخذونها فعجل لكم هذه وكف أيدي الناس عنكم ولتكون آية للمؤمنين ويهديكم صراطا مستقيما
Allah has promised you many gains that ye shall acquire, and He has given you these beforehand; and He has restrained the hands of men from you; that it may be a Sign for the Believers, and that He may guide you to a Straight Path;

وأخرى لم تقدروا عليها قد أحاط الله بها وكان الله على كل شيء قديرا
And other gains (there are), which are not within your power, but which Allah has compassed: and Allah has power over all things.

ولو قاتلكم الذين كفروا لولوا الأدبار ثم لا يجدون وليا ولا نصيرا
If the Unbelievers should fight you, they would certainly turn their backs; then would they find neither protector nor helper.

سنة الله التي قد خلت من قبل ولن تجد لسنة الله تبديلا
(Such has been) the practice (approved) of Allah already in the past: no change wilt thou find in the practice (approved) of Allah.

وهو الذي كف أيديهم عنكم وأيديكم عنهم ببطن مكة من بعد أن أظفركم عليهم وكان الله بما تعملون بصيرا
And it is He Who has restrained their hands from you and your hands from them in the midst of Makka, after that He gave you the victory over them. And Allah sees well all that ye do.

هم الذين كفروا وصدوكم عن المسجد الحرام والهدي معكوفا أن يبلغ محله ولولا رجال مؤمنون ونساء مؤمنات لم تعلموهم أن تطئوهم فتصيبكم منهم معرة بغير علم ليدخل الله في رحمته من يشاء لو تزيلوا لعذبنا الذين كفروا منهم عذابا أليما
They are the ones who denied Revelation and hindered you from the Sacred Mosque and the sacrificial animals, detained from reaching their place of sacrifice. Had there not been believing men and believing women whom ye did not know that ye were trampling down and on whose account a crime would have accrued to you without (your) knowledge, (Allah would have allowed you to force your way, but He held back your hands) that He may admit to His Mercy whom He will. If they had been apart, We should certainly have punished the Unbelievers among them with a grievous Punishment.

إذ جعل الذين كفروا في قلوبهم الحمية حمية الجاهلية فأنزل الله سكينته على رسوله وعلى المؤمنين وألزمهم كلمة التقوى وكانوا أحق بها وأهلها وكان الله بكل شيء عليما
While the Unbelievers got up in their hearts heat and cant - the heat and cant of ignorance,- Allah sent down His Tranquillity to his Messenger and to the Believers, and made them stick close to the command of self-restraint; and well were they entitled to it and worthy of it. And Allah has full knowledge of all things.

لقد صدق الله رسوله الرؤيا بالحق لتدخلن المسجد الحرام إن شاء الله آمنين محلقين رءوسكم ومقصرين لا تخافون فعلم ما لم تعلموا فجعل من دون ذلك فتحا قريبا
Truly did Allah fulfil the vision for His Messenger: ye shall enter the Sacred Mosque, if Allah wills, with minds secure, heads shaved, hair cut short, and without fear. For He knew what ye knew not, and He granted, besides this, a speedy victory.

هو الذي أرسل رسوله بالهدى ودين الحق ليظهره على الدين كله وكفى بالله شهيدا
It is He Who has sent His Messenger with Guidance and the Religion of Truth, to proclaim it over all religion: and enough is Allah for a Witness.

محمد رسول الله والذين معه أشداء على الكفار رحماء بينهم تراهم ركعا سجدا يبتغون فضلا من الله ورضوانا سيماهم في وجوههم من أثر السجود ذلك مثلهم في التوراة ومثلهم في الإنجيل كزرع أخرج شطأه فآزره فاستغلظ فاستوى على سوقه يعجب الزراع ليغيظ بهم الكفار وعد الله الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات منهم مغفرة وأجرا عظيما
Muhammad is the messenger of Allah; and those who are with him are strong against Unbelievers, (but) compassionate amongst each other. Thou wilt see them bow and prostrate themselves (in prayer), seeking Grace from Allah and (His) Good Pleasure. On their faces are their marks, (being) the traces of their prostration. This is their similitude in the Taurat; and their similitude in the Gospel is: like a seed which sends forth its blade, then makes it strong; it then becomes thick, and it stands on its own stem, (filling) the sowers with wonder and delight. As a result, it fills the Unbelievers with rage at them. Allah has promised those among them who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness, and a great Reward.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تقدموا بين يدي الله ورسوله واتقوا الله إن الله سميع عليم
O Ye who believe! Put not yourselves forward before Allah and His Messenger; but fear Allah: for Allah is He Who hears and knows all things.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا ترفعوا أصواتكم فوق صوت النبي ولا تجهروا له بالقول كجهر بعضكم لبعض أن تحبط أعمالكم وأنتم لا تشعرون
O ye who believe! Raise not your voices above the voice of the Prophet, nor speak aloud to him in talk, as ye may speak aloud to one another, lest your deeds become vain and ye perceive not.

إن الذين يغضون أصواتهم عند رسول الله أولئك الذين امتحن الله قلوبهم للتقوى لهم مغفرة وأجر عظيم
Those that lower their voices in the presence of Allah's Messenger,- their hearts has Allah tested for piety: for them is Forgiveness and a great Reward.

إن الذين ينادونك من وراء الحجرات أكثرهم لا يعقلون
Those who shout out to thee from without the inner apartments - most of them lack understanding.

ولو أنهم صبروا حتى تخرج إليهم لكان خيرا لهم والله غفور رحيم
If only they had patience until thou couldst come out to them, it would be best for them: but Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إن جاءكم فاسق بنبإ فتبينوا أن تصيبوا قوما بجهالة فتصبحوا على ما فعلتم نادمين
O ye who believe! If a wicked person comes to you with any news, ascertain the truth, lest ye harm people unwittingly, and afterwards become full of repentance for what ye have done.

واعلموا أن فيكم رسول الله لو يطيعكم في كثير من الأمر لعنتم ولكن الله حبب إليكم الإيمان وزينه في قلوبكم وكره إليكم الكفر والفسوق والعصيان أولئك هم الراشدون
And know that among you is Allah's Messenger: were he, in many matters, to follow your (wishes), ye would certainly fall into misfortune: But Allah has endeared the Faith to you, and has made it beautiful in your hearts, and He has made hateful to you Unbelief, wickedness, and rebellion: such indeed are those who walk in righteousness;-

فضلا من الله ونعمة والله عليم حكيم
A Grace and Favour from Allah; and Allah is full of Knowledge and Wisdom.

وإن طائفتان من المؤمنين اقتتلوا فأصلحوا بينهما فإن بغت إحداهما على الأخرى فقاتلوا التي تبغي حتى تفيء إلى أمر الله فإن فاءت فأصلحوا بينهما بالعدل وأقسطوا إن الله يحب المقسطين
If two parties among the Believers fall into a quarrel, make ye peace between them: but if one of them transgresses beyond bounds against the other, then fight ye (all) against the one that transgresses until it complies with the command of Allah; but if it complies, then make peace between them with justice, and be fair: for Allah loves those who are fair (and just).

إنما المؤمنون إخوة فأصلحوا بين أخويكم واتقوا الله لعلكم ترحمون
The Believers are but a single Brotherhood: So make peace and reconciliation between your two (contending) brothers; and fear Allah, that ye may receive Mercy.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا يسخر قوم من قوم عسى أن يكونوا خيرا منهم ولا نساء من نساء عسى أن يكن خيرا منهن ولا تلمزوا أنفسكم ولا تنابزوا بالألقاب بئس الاسم الفسوق بعد الإيمان ومن لم يتب فأولئك هم الظالمون
O ye who believe! Let not some men among you laugh at others: It may be that the (latter) are better than the (former): Nor let some women laugh at others: It may be that the (latter are better than the (former): Nor defame nor be sarcastic to each other, nor call each other by (offensive) nicknames: Ill-seeming is a name connoting wickedness, (to be used of one) after he has believed: And those who do not desist are (indeed) doing wrong.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا اجتنبوا كثيرا من الظن إن بعض الظن إثم ولا تجسسوا ولا يغتب بعضكم بعضا أيحب أحدكم أن يأكل لحم أخيه ميتا فكرهتموه واتقوا الله إن الله تواب رحيم
O ye who believe! Avoid suspicion as much (as possible): for suspicion in some cases is a sin: And spy not on each other behind their backs. Would any of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? Nay, ye would abhor it... But fear Allah: For Allah is Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

يا أيها الناس إنا خلقناكم من ذكر وأنثى وجعلناكم شعوبا وقبائل لتعارفوا إن أكرمكم عند الله أتقاكم إن الله عليم خبير
O mankind! We created you from a single (pair) of a male and a female, and made you into nations and tribes, that ye may know each other (not that ye may despise (each other). Verily the most honoured of you in the sight of Allah is (he who is) the most righteous of you. And Allah has full knowledge and is well acquainted (with all things).

قالت الأعراب آمنا قل لم تؤمنوا ولكن قولوا أسلمنا ولما يدخل الإيمان في قلوبكم وإن تطيعوا الله ورسوله لا يلتكم من أعمالكم شيئا إن الله غفور رحيم
The desert Arabs say, "We believe." Say, "Ye have no faith; but ye (only) say, 'We have submitted our wills to Allah,' For not yet has Faith entered your hearts. But if ye obey Allah and His Messenger, He will not belittle aught of your deeds: for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

إنما المؤمنون الذين آمنوا بالله ورسوله ثم لم يرتابوا وجاهدوا بأموالهم وأنفسهم في سبيل الله أولئك هم الصادقون
Only those are Believers who have believed in Allah and His Messenger, and have never since doubted, but have striven with their belongings and their persons in the Cause of Allah: Such are the sincere ones.

قل أتعلمون الله بدينكم والله يعلم ما في السماوات وما في الأرض والله بكل شيء عليم
Say: "What! Will ye instruct Allah about your religion? But Allah knows all that is in the heavens and on earth: He has full knowledge of all things.

يمنون عليك أن أسلموا قل لا تمنوا علي إسلامكم بل الله يمن عليكم أن هداكم للإيمان إن كنتم صادقين
They impress on thee as a favour that they have embraced Islam. Say, "Count not your Islam as a favour upon me: Nay, Allah has conferred a favour upon you that He has guided you to the faith, if ye be true and sincere.

إن الله يعلم غيب السماوات والأرض والله بصير بما تعملون
"Verily Allah knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth: and Allah Sees well all that ye do."

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم ق والقرآن المجيد
Qaf: By the Glorious Qur'an (Thou art Allah's Messenger).

بل عجبوا أن جاءهم منذر منهم فقال الكافرون هذا شيء عجيب
But they wonder that there has come to them a Warner from among themselves. So the Unbelievers say: "This is a wonderful thing!

أإذا متنا وكنا ترابا ذلك رجع بعيد
"What! When we die and become dust, (shall we live again?) That is a (sort of) return far (from our understanding)."

قد علمنا ما تنقص الأرض منهم وعندنا كتاب حفيظ
We already know how much of them the earth takes away: With Us is a record guarding (the full account).

بل كذبوا بالحق لما جاءهم فهم في أمر مريج
But they deny the Truth when it comes to them: so they are in a confused state.

أفلم ينظروا إلى السماء فوقهم كيف بنيناها وزيناها وما لها من فروج
Do they not look at the sky above them?- How We have made it and adorned it, and there are no flaws in it?

والأرض مددناها وألقينا فيها رواسي وأنبتنا فيها من كل زوج بهيج
And the earth- We have spread it out, and set thereon mountains standing firm, and produced therein every kind of beautiful growth (in pairs)-

تبصرة وذكرى لكل عبد منيب
To be observed and commemorated by every devotee turning (to Allah).

ونزلنا من السماء ماء مباركا فأنبتنا به جنات وحب الحصيد
And We send down from the sky rain charted with blessing, and We produce therewith gardens and Grain for harvests;

والنخل باسقات لها طلع نضيد
And tall (and stately) palm-trees, with shoots of fruit-stalks, piled one over another;-

رزقا للعباد وأحيينا به بلدة ميتا كذلك الخروج
As sustenance for (Allah's) Servants;- and We give (new) life therewith to land that is dead: Thus will be the Resurrection.

كذبت قبلهم قوم نوح وأصحاب الرس وثمود
Before them was denied (the Hereafter) by the People of Noah, the Companions of the Rass, the Thamud,

وعاد وفرعون وإخوان لوط
The 'Ad, Pharaoh, the brethren of Lut,

وأصحاب الأيكة وقوم تبع كل كذب الرسل فحق وعيد
The Companions of the Wood, and the People of Tubba'; each one (of them) rejected the messengers, and My warning was duly fulfilled (in them).

أفعيينا بالخلق الأول بل هم في لبس من خلق جديد
Were We then weary with the first Creation, that they should be in confused doubt about a new Creation?

ولقد خلقنا الإنسان ونعلم ما توسوس به نفسه ونحن أقرب إليه من حبل الوريد
It was We Who created man, and We know what dark suggestions his soul makes to him: for We are nearer to him than (his) jugular vein.

إذ يتلقى المتلقيان عن اليمين وعن الشمال قعيد
Behold, two (guardian angels) appointed to learn (his doings) learn (and noted them), one sitting on the right and one on the left.

ما يلفظ من قول إلا لديه رقيب عتيد
Not a word does he utter but there is a sentinel by him, ready (to note it).

وجاءت سكرة الموت بالحق ذلك ما كنت منه تحيد
And the stupor of death will bring Truth (before his eyes): "This was the thing which thou wast trying to escape!"

ونفخ في الصور ذلك يوم الوعيد
And the Trumpet shall be blown: that will be the Day whereof Warning (had been given).

وجاءت كل نفس معها سائق وشهيد
And there will come forth every soul: with each will be an (angel) to drive, and an (angel) to bear witness.

لقد كنت في غفلة من هذا فكشفنا عنك غطاءك فبصرك اليوم حديد
(It will be said:) "Thou wast heedless of this; now have We removed thy veil, and sharp is thy sight this Day!"

وقال قرينه هذا ما لدي عتيد
And his Companion will say: "Here is (his Record) ready with me!"

ألقيا في جهنم كل كفار عنيد
(The sentence will be:) "Throw, throw into Hell every contumacious Rejecter (of Allah)!-

مناع للخير معتد مريب
"Who forbade what was good, transgressed all bounds, cast doubts and suspicions;

الذي جعل مع الله إلها آخر فألقياه في العذاب الشديد
"Who set up another god beside Allah: Throw him into a severe penalty."

قال قرينه ربنا ما أطغيته ولكن كان في ضلال بعيد
His Companion will say: "Our Lord! I did not make him transgress, but he was (himself) far astray."

قال لا تختصموا لدي وقد قدمت إليكم بالوعيد
He will say: "Dispute not with each other in My Presence: I had already in advance sent you Warning.

ما يبدل القول لدي وما أنا بظلام للعبيد
"The Word changes not before Me, and I do not the least injustice to My Servants."

يوم نقول لجهنم هل امتلأت وتقول هل من مزيد
One Day We will ask Hell, "Art thou filled to the full?" It will say, "Are there any more (to come)?"

وأزلفت الجنة للمتقين غير بعيد
And the Garden will be brought nigh to the Righteous,- no more a thing distant.

هذا ما توعدون لكل أواب حفيظ
(A voice will say:) "This is what was promised for you,- for every one who turned (to Allah) in sincere repentance, who kept (His Law),

من خشي الرحمن بالغيب وجاء بقلب منيب
"Who feared (Allah) Most Gracious Unseen, and brought a heart turned in devotion (to Him):

ادخلوها بسلام ذلك يوم الخلود
"Enter ye therein in Peace and Security; this is a Day of Eternal Life!"

لهم ما يشاءون فيها ولدينا مزيد
There will be for them therein all that they wish,- and more besides in Our Presence.

وكم أهلكنا قبلهم من قرن هم أشد منهم بطشا فنقبوا في البلاد هل من محيص
But how many generations before them did We destroy (for their sins),- stronger in power than they? Then did they wander through the land: was there any place of escape (for them)?

إن في ذلك لذكرى لمن كان له قلب أو ألقى السمع وهو شهيد
Verily in this is a Message for any that has a heart and understanding or who gives ear and earnestly witnesses (the truth).

ولقد خلقنا السماوات والأرض وما بينهما في ستة أيام وما مسنا من لغوب
We created the heavens and the earth and all between them in Six Days, nor did any sense of weariness touch Us.

فاصبر على ما يقولون وسبح بحمد ربك قبل طلوع الشمس وقبل الغروب
Bear, then, with patience, all that they say, and celebrate the praises of thy Lord, before the rising of the sun and before (its) setting.

ومن الليل فسبحه وأدبار السجود
And during part of the night, (also,) celebrate His praises, and (so likewise) after the postures of adoration.

واستمع يوم يناد المناد من مكان قريب
And listen for the Day when the Caller will call out from a place quiet near,-

يوم يسمعون الصيحة بالحق ذلك يوم الخروج
The Day when they will hear a (mighty) Blast in (very) truth: that will be the Day of Resurrection.

إنا نحن نحيي ونميت وإلينا المصير
Verily it is We Who give Life and Death; and to Us is the Final Goal-

يوم تشقق الأرض عنهم سراعا ذلك حشر علينا يسير
The Day when the Earth will be rent asunder, from (men) hurrying out: that will be a gathering together,- quite easy for Us.

نحن أعلم بما يقولون وما أنت عليهم بجبار فذكر بالقرآن من يخاف وعيد
We know best what they say; and thou art not one to overawe them by force. So admonish with the Qur'an such as fear My Warning!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم والذاريات ذروا
By the (Winds) that scatter broadcast;

فالحاملات وقرا
And those that lift and bear away heavy weights;

فالجاريات يسرا
And those that flow with ease and gentleness;

فالمقسمات أمرا
And those that distribute and apportion by Command;-

إنما توعدون لصادق
Verily that which ye are promised is true;

وإن الدين لواقع
And verily Judgment and Justice must indeed come to pass.

والسماء ذات الحبك
By the Sky with (its) numerous Paths,

إنكم لفي قول مختلف
Truly ye are in a doctrine discordant,

يؤفك عنه من أفك
Through which are deluded (away from the Truth) such as would be deluded.

قتل الخراصون
Woe to the falsehood-mongers,-

الذين هم في غمرة ساهون
Those who (flounder) heedless in a flood of confusion:

يسألون أيان يوم الدين
They ask, "When will be the Day of Judgment and Justice?"

يوم هم على النار يفتنون
(It will be) a Day when they will be tried (and tested) over the Fire!

ذوقوا فتنتكم هذا الذي كنتم به تستعجلون
"Taste ye your trial! This is what ye used to ask to be hastened!"

إن المتقين في جنات وعيون
As to the Righteous, they will be in the midst of Gardens and Springs,

آخذين ما آتاهم ربهم إنهم كانوا قبل ذلك محسنين
Taking joy in the things which their Lord gives them, because, before then, they lived a good life.

كانوا قليلا من الليل ما يهجعون
They were in the habit of sleeping but little by night,

وبالأسحار هم يستغفرون
And in the hour of early dawn, they (were found) praying for Forgiveness;

وفي أموالهم حق للسائل والمحروم
And in their wealth and possessions (was remembered) the right of the (needy,) him who asked, and him who (for some reason) was prevented (from asking).

وفي الأرض آيات للموقنين
On the earth are signs for those of assured Faith,

وفي أنفسكم أفلا تبصرون
As also in your own selves: Will ye not then see?

وفي السماء رزقكم وما توعدون
And in heaven is your Sustenance, as (also) that which ye are promised.

فورب السماء والأرض إنه لحق مثل ما أنكم تنطقون
Then, by the Lord of heaven and earth, this is the very Truth, as much as the fact that ye can speak intelligently to each other.

هل أتاك حديث ضيف إبراهيم المكرمين
Has the story reached thee, of the honoured guests of Abraham?

إذ دخلوا عليه فقالوا سلاما قال سلام قوم منكرون
Behold, they entered his presence, and said: "Peace!" He said, "Peace!" (and thought, "These seem) unusual people."

فراغ إلى أهله فجاء بعجل سمين
Then he turned quickly to his household, brought out a fatted calf,

فقربه إليهم قال ألا تأكلون
And placed it before them.. he said, "Will ye not eat?"

فأوجس منهم خيفة قالوا لا تخف وبشروه بغلام عليم
(When they did not eat), He conceived a fear of them. They said, "Fear not," and they gave him glad tidings of a son endowed with knowledge.

فأقبلت امرأته في صرة فصكت وجهها وقالت عجوز عقيم
But his wife came forward (laughing) aloud: she smote her forehead and said: "A barren old woman!"

قالوا كذلك قال ربك إنه هو الحكيم العليم
They said, "Even so has thy Lord spoken: and He is full of Wisdom and Knowledge."

قال فما خطبكم أيها المرسلون
(Abraham) said: "And what, O ye Messengers, is your errand (now)?"

قالوا إنا أرسلنا إلى قوم مجرمين
They said, "We have been sent to a people (deep) in sin;-

لنرسل عليهم حجارة من طين
"To bring on, on them, (a shower of) stones of clay (brimstone),

مسومة عند ربك للمسرفين
"Marked as from thy Lord for those who trespass beyond bounds."

فأخرجنا من كان فيها من المؤمنين
Then We evacuated those of the Believers who were there,

فما وجدنا فيها غير بيت من المسلمين
But We found not there any just (Muslim) persons except in one house:

وتركنا فيها آية للذين يخافون العذاب الأليم
And We left there a Sign for such as fear the Grievous Penalty.

وفي موسى إذ أرسلناه إلى فرعون بسلطان مبين
And in Moses (was another Sign): Behold, We sent him to Pharaoh, with authority manifest.

فتولى بركنه وقال ساحر أو مجنون
But (Pharaoh) turned back with his Chiefs, and said, "A sorcerer, or one possessed!"

فأخذناه وجنوده فنبذناهم في اليم وهو مليم
So We took him and his forces, and threw them into the sea; and his was the blame.

وفي عاد إذ أرسلنا عليهم الريح العقيم
And in the 'Ad (people) (was another Sign): Behold, We sent against them the devastating Wind:

ما تذر من شيء أتت عليه إلا جعلته كالرميم
It left nothing whatever that it came up against, but reduced it to ruin and rottenness.

وفي ثمود إذ قيل لهم تمتعوا حتى حين
And in the Thamud (was another Sign): Behold, they were told, "Enjoy (your brief day) for a little while!"

فعتوا عن أمر ربهم فأخذتهم الصاعقة وهم ينظرون
But they insolently defied the Command of their Lord: So the stunning noise (of an earthquake) seized them, even while they were looking on.

فما استطاعوا من قيام وما كانوا منتصرين
Then they could not even stand (on their feet), nor could they help themselves.

وقوم نوح من قبل إنهم كانوا قوما فاسقين
So were the People of Noah before them for they wickedly transgressed.

والسماء بنيناها بأيد وإنا لموسعون
With power and skill did We construct the Firmament: for it is We Who create the vastness of pace.

والأرض فرشناها فنعم الماهدون
And We have spread out the (spacious) earth: How excellently We do spread out!

ومن كل شيء خلقنا زوجين لعلكم تذكرون
And of every thing We have created pairs: That ye may receive instruction.

ففروا إلى الله إني لكم منه نذير مبين
Hasten ye then (at once) to Allah: I am from Him a Warner to you, clear and open!

ولا تجعلوا مع الله إلها آخر إني لكم منه نذير مبين
And make not another an object of worship with Allah: I am from Him a Warner to you, clear and open!

كذلك ما أتى الذين من قبلهم من رسول إلا قالوا ساحر أو مجنون
Similarly, no messenger came to the Peoples before them, but they said (of him) in like manner, "A sorcerer, or one possessed"!

أتواصوا به بل هم قوم طاغون
Is this the legacy they have transmitted, one to another? Nay, they are themselves a people transgressing beyond bounds!

فتول عنهم فما أنت بملوم
So turn away from them: not thine is the blame.

وذكر فإن الذكرى تنفع المؤمنين
But teach (thy Message) for teaching benefits the Believers.

وما خلقت الجن والإنس إلا ليعبدون
I have only created Jinns and men, that they may serve Me.

ما أريد منهم من رزق وما أريد أن يطعمون
No Sustenance do I require of them, nor do I require that they should feed Me.

إن الله هو الرزاق ذو القوة المتين
For Allah is He Who gives (all) Sustenance,- Lord of Power,- Steadfast (for ever).

فإن للذين ظلموا ذنوبا مثل ذنوب أصحابهم فلا يستعجلون
For the Wrong-doers, their portion is like unto the portion of their fellows (of earlier generations): then let them not ask Me to hasten (that portion)!

فويل للذين كفروا من يومهم الذي يوعدون
Woe, then, to the Unbelievers, on account of that Day of theirs which they have been promised!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم والطور
By the Mount (of Revelation);

وكتاب مسطور
By a Decree inscribed

في رق منشور
In a Scroll unfolded;

والبيت المعمور
By the much-frequented Fane;

والسقف المرفوع
By the Canopy Raised High;

والبحر المسجور
And by the Ocean filled with Swell;-

إن عذاب ربك لواقع
Verily, the Doom of thy Lord will indeed come to pass;-

ما له من دافع
There is none can avert it;-

يوم تمور السماء مورا
On the Day when the firmament will be in dreadful commotion.

وتسير الجبال سيرا
And the mountains will fly hither and thither.

فويل يومئذ للمكذبين
Then woe that Day to those that treat (Truth) as Falsehood;-

الذين هم في خوض يلعبون
That play (and paddle) in shallow trifles.

يوم يدعون إلى نار جهنم دعا
That Day shall they be thrust down to the Fire of Hell, irresistibly.

هذه النار التي كنتم بها تكذبون
"This:, it will be said, "Is the Fire,- which ye were wont to deny!

أفسحر هذا أم أنتم لا تبصرون
"Is this then a fake, or is it ye that do not see?

اصلوها فاصبروا أو لا تصبروا سواء عليكم إنما تجزون ما كنتم تعملون
"Burn ye therein: the same is it to you whether ye bear it with patience, or not: Ye but receive the recompense of your (own) deeds."

إن المتقين في جنات ونعيم
As to the Righteous, they will be in Gardens, and in Happiness,-

فاكهين بما آتاهم ربهم ووقاهم ربهم عذاب الجحيم
Enjoying the (Bliss) which their Lord hath bestowed on them, and their Lord shall deliver them from the Penalty of the Fire.

كلوا واشربوا هنيئا بما كنتم تعملون
(To them will be said:) "Eat and drink ye, with profit and health, because of your (good) deeds."

متكئين على سرر مصفوفة وزوجناهم بحور عين
They will recline (with ease) on Thrones (of dignity) arranged in ranks; and We shall join them to Companions, with beautiful big and lustrous eyes.

والذين آمنوا واتبعتهم ذريتهم بإيمان ألحقنا بهم ذريتهم وما ألتناهم من عملهم من شيء كل امرئ بما كسب رهين
And those who believe and whose families follow them in Faith,- to them shall We join their families: Nor shall We deprive them (of the fruit) of aught of their works: (Yet) is each individual in pledge for his deeds.

وأمددناهم بفاكهة ولحم مما يشتهون
And We shall bestow on them, of fruit and meat, anything they shall desire.

يتنازعون فيها كأسا لا لغو فيها ولا تأثيم
They shall there exchange, one with another, a (loving) cup free of frivolity, free of all taint of ill.

ويطوف عليهم غلمان لهم كأنهم لؤلؤ مكنون
Round about them will serve, (devoted) to them, young male servants (handsome) as Pearls well-guarded.

وأقبل بعضهم على بعض يتساءلون
They will advance to each other, engaging in mutual enquiry.

قالوا إنا كنا قبل في أهلنا مشفقين
They will say: "Aforetime, we were not without fear for the sake of our people.

فمن الله علينا ووقانا عذاب السموم
"But Allah has been good to us, and has delivered us from the Penalty of the Scorching Wind.

إنا كنا من قبل ندعوه إنه هو البر الرحيم
"Truly, we did call unto Him from of old: truly it is He, the Beneficent, the Merciful!"

فذكر فما أنت بنعمت ربك بكاهن ولا مجنون
Therefore proclaim thou the praises (of thy Lord): for by the Grace of thy Lord, thou art no (vulgar) soothsayer, nor art thou one possessed.

أم يقولون شاعر نتربص به ريب المنون
Or do they say:- "A Poet! we await for him some calamity (hatched) by Time!"

قل تربصوا فإني معكم من المتربصين
Say thou: "Await ye!- I too will wait along with you!"

أم تأمرهم أحلامهم بهذا أم هم قوم طاغون
Is it that their faculties of understanding urge them to this, or are they but a people transgressing beyond bounds?

أم يقولون تقوله بل لا يؤمنون
Or do they say, "He fabricated the (Message)"? Nay, they have no faith!

فليأتوا بحديث مثله إن كانوا صادقين
Let them then produce a recital like unto it,- If (it be) they speak the truth!

أم خلقوا من غير شيء أم هم الخالقون
Were they created of nothing, or were they themselves the creators?

أم خلقوا السماوات والأرض بل لا يوقنون
Or did they create the heavens and the earth? Nay, they have no firm belief.

أم عندهم خزائن ربك أم هم المصيطرون
Or are the Treasures of thy Lord with them, or are they the managers (of affairs)?

أم لهم سلم يستمعون فيه فليأت مستمعهم بسلطان مبين
Or have they a ladder, by which they can (climb up to heaven and) listen (to its secrets)? Then let (such a) listener of theirs produce a manifest proof.

أم له البنات ولكم البنون
Or has He only daughters and ye have sons?

أم تسألهم أجرا فهم من مغرم مثقلون
Or is it that thou dost ask for a reward, so that they are burdened with a load of debt?-

أم عندهم الغيب فهم يكتبون
Or that the Unseen in it their hands, and they write it down?

أم يريدون كيدا فالذين كفروا هم المكيدون
Or do they intend a plot (against thee)? But those who defy Allah are themselves involved in a Plot!

أم لهم إله غير الله سبحان الله عما يشركون
Or have they a god other than Allah? Exalted is Allah far above the things they associate with Him!

وإن يروا كسفا من السماء ساقطا يقولوا سحاب مركوم
Were they to see a piece of the sky falling (on them), they would (only) say: "Clouds gathered in heaps!"

فذرهم حتى يلاقوا يومهم الذي فيه يصعقون
So leave them alone until they encounter that Day of theirs, wherein they shall (perforce) swoon (with terror),-

يوم لا يغني عنهم كيدهم شيئا ولا هم ينصرون
The Day when their plotting will avail them nothing and no help shall be given them.

وإن للذين ظلموا عذابا دون ذلك ولكن أكثرهم لا يعلمون
And verily, for those who do wrong, there is another punishment besides this: But most of them understand not.

واصبر لحكم ربك فإنك بأعيننا وسبح بحمد ربك حين تقوم
Now await in patience the command of thy Lord: for verily thou art in Our eyes: and celebrate the praises of thy Lord the while thou standest forth,

ومن الليل فسبحه وإدبار النجوم
And for part of the night also praise thou Him,- and at the retreat of the stars!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم والنجم إذا هوى
By the Star when it goes down,-

ما ضل صاحبكم وما غوى
Your Companion is neither astray nor being misled.

وما ينطق عن الهوى
Nor does he say (aught) of (his own) Desire.

إن هو إلا وحي يوحى
It is no less than inspiration sent down to him:

علمه شديد القوى
He was taught by one Mighty in Power,

ذو مرة فاستوى
Endued with Wisdom: for he appeared (in stately form);

وهو بالأفق الأعلى
While he was in the highest part of the horizon:

ثم دنا فتدلى
Then he approached and came closer,

فكان قاب قوسين أو أدنى
And was at a distance of but two bow-lengths or (even) nearer;

فأوحى إلى عبده ما أوحى
So did (Allah) convey the inspiration to His Servant- (conveyed) what He (meant) to convey.

ما كذب الفؤاد ما رأى
The (Prophet's) (mind and) heart in no way falsified that which he saw.

أفتمارونه على ما يرى
Will ye then dispute with him concerning what he saw?

ولقد رآه نزلة أخرى
For indeed he saw him at a second descent,

عند سدرة المنتهى
Near the Lote-tree beyond which none may pass:

عندها جنة المأوى
Near it is the Garden of Abode.

إذ يغشى السدرة ما يغشى
Behold, the Lote-tree was shrouded (in mystery unspeakable!)

ما زاغ البصر وما طغى
(His) sight never swerved, nor did it go wrong!

لقد رأى من آيات ربه الكبرى
For truly did he see, of the Signs of his Lord, the Greatest!

أفرأيتم اللات والعزى
Have ye seen Lat. and 'Uzza,

ومناة الثالثة الأخرى
And another, the third (goddess), Manat?

ألكم الذكر وله الأنثى
What! for you the male sex, and for Him, the female?

تلك إذا قسمة ضيزى
Behold, such would be indeed a division most unfair!

إن هي إلا أسماء سميتموها أنتم وآباؤكم ما أنزل الله بها من سلطان إن يتبعون إلا الظن وما تهوى الأنفس ولقد جاءهم من ربهم الهدى
These are nothing but names which ye have devised,- ye and your fathers,- for which Allah has sent down no authority (whatever). They follow nothing but conjecture and what their own souls desire!- Even though there has already come to them Guidance from their Lord!

أم للإنسان ما تمنى
Nay, shall man have (just) anything he hankers after?

فلله الآخرة والأولى
But it is to Allah that the End and the Beginning (of all things) belong.

وكم من ملك في السماوات لا تغني شفاعتهم شيئا إلا من بعد أن يأذن الله لمن يشاء ويرضى
How many-so-ever be the angels in the heavens, their intercession will avail nothing except after Allah has given leave for whom He pleases and that he is acceptable to Him.

إن الذين لا يؤمنون بالآخرة ليسمون الملائكة تسمية الأنثى
Those who believe not in the Hereafter, name the angels with female names.

وما لهم به من علم إن يتبعون إلا الظن وإن الظن لا يغني من الحق شيئا
But they have no knowledge therein. They follow nothing but conjecture; and conjecture avails nothing against Truth.

فأعرض عن من تولى عن ذكرنا ولم يرد إلا الحياة الدنيا
Therefore shun those who turn away from Our Message and desire nothing but the life of this world.

ذلك مبلغهم من العلم إن ربك هو أعلم بمن ضل عن سبيله وهو أعلم بمن اهتدى
That is as far as knowledge will reach them. Verily thy Lord knoweth best those who stray from His Path, and He knoweth best those who receive guidance.

ولله ما في السماوات وما في الأرض ليجزي الذين أساءوا بما عملوا ويجزي الذين أحسنوا بالحسنى
Yea, to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth: so that He rewards those who do evil, according to their deeds, and He rewards those who do good, with what is best.

الذين يجتنبون كبائر الإثم والفواحش إلا اللمم إن ربك واسع المغفرة هو أعلم بكم إذ أنشأكم من الأرض وإذ أنتم أجنة في بطون أمهاتكم فلا تزكوا أنفسكم هو أعلم بمن اتقى
Those who avoid great sins and shameful deeds, only (falling into) small faults,- verily thy Lord is ample in forgiveness. He knows you well when He brings you out of the earth, And when ye are hidden in your mothers' wombs. Therefore justify not yourselves: He knows best who it is that guards against evil.

أفرأيت الذي تولى
Seest thou one who turns back,

وأعطى قليلا وأكدى
Gives a little, then hardens (his heart)?

أعنده علم الغيب فهو يرى
What! Has he knowledge of the Unseen so that he can see?

أم لم ينبأ بما في صحف موسى
Nay, is he not acquainted with what is in the Books of Moses-

وإبراهيم الذي وفى
And of Abraham who fulfilled his engagements?-

ألا تزر وازرة وزر أخرى
Namely, that no bearer of burdens can bear the burden of another;

وأن ليس للإنسان إلا ما سعى
That man can have nothing but what he strives for;

وأن سعيه سوف يرى
That (the fruit of) his striving will soon come in sight:

ثم يجزاه الجزاء الأوفى
Then will he be rewarded with a reward complete;

وأن إلى ربك المنتهى
That to thy Lord is the final Goal;

وأنه هو أضحك وأبكى
That it is He Who granteth Laughter and Tears;

وأنه هو أمات وأحيا
That it is He Who granteth Death and Life;

وأنه خلق الزوجين الذكر والأنثى
That He did create in pairs,- male and female,

من نطفة إذا تمنى
From a seed when lodged (in its place);

وأن عليه النشأة الأخرى
That He hath promised a Second Creation (Raising of the Dead);

وأنه هو أغنى وأقنى
That it is He Who giveth wealth and satisfaction;

وأنه هو رب الشعرى
That He is the Lord of Sirius (the Mighty Star);

وأنه أهلك عادا الأولى
And that it is He Who destroyed the (powerful) ancient 'Ad (people),

وثمود فما أبقى
And the Thamud nor gave them a lease of perpetual life.

وقوم نوح من قبل إنهم كانوا هم أظلم وأطغى
And before them, the people of Noah, for that they were (all) most unjust and most insolent transgressors,

والمؤتفكة أهوى
And He destroyed the Overthrown Cities (of Sodom and Gomorrah).

فغشاها ما غشى
So that (ruins unknown) have covered them up.

فبأي آلاء ربك تتمارى
Then which of the gifts of thy Lord, (O man,) wilt thou dispute about?

هذا نذير من النذر الأولى
This is a Warner, of the (series of) Warners of old!

أزفت الآزفة
The (Judgment) ever approaching draws nigh:

ليس لها من دون الله كاشفة
No (soul) but Allah can lay it bare.

أفمن هذا الحديث تعجبون
Do ye then wonder at this recital?

وتضحكون ولا تبكون
And will ye laugh and not weep,-

وأنتم سامدون
Wasting your time in vanities?

فاسجدوا لله واعبدوا
But fall ye down in prostration to Allah, and adore (Him)!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم اقتربت الساعة وانشق القمر
The Hour (of Judgment) is nigh, and the moon is cleft asunder.

وإن يروا آية يعرضوا ويقولوا سحر مستمر
But if they see a Sign, they turn away, and say, "This is (but) transient magic."

وكذبوا واتبعوا أهواءهم وكل أمر مستقر
They reject (the warning) and follow their (own) lusts but every matter has its appointed time.

ولقد جاءهم من الأنباء ما فيه مزدجر
There have already come to them Recitals wherein there is (enough) to check (them),

حكمة بالغة فما تغن النذر
Mature wisdom;- but (the preaching of) Warners profits them not.

فتول عنهم يوم يدع الداع إلى شيء نكر
Therefore, (O Prophet,) turn away from them. The Day that the Caller will call (them) to a terrible affair,

خشعا أبصارهم يخرجون من الأجداث كأنهم جراد منتشر
They will come forth,- their eyes humbled - from (their) graves, (torpid) like locusts scattered abroad,

مهطعين إلى الداع يقول الكافرون هذا يوم عسر
Hastening, with eyes transfixed, towards the Caller!- "Hard is this Day!", the Unbelievers will say.

كذبت قبلهم قوم نوح فكذبوا عبدنا وقالوا مجنون وازدجر
Before them the People of Noah rejected (their messenger): they rejected Our servant, and said, "Here is one possessed!", and he was driven out.

فدعا ربه أني مغلوب فانتصر
Then he called on his Lord: "I am one overcome: do Thou then help (me)!"

ففتحنا أبواب السماء بماء منهمر
So We opened the gates of heaven, with water pouring forth.

وفجرنا الأرض عيونا فالتقى الماء على أمر قد قدر
And We caused the earth to gush forth with springs, so the waters met (and rose) to the extent decreed.

وحملناه على ذات ألواح ودسر
But We bore him on an (Ark) made of broad planks and caulked with palm-fibre:

تجري بأعيننا جزاء لمن كان كفر
She floats under our eyes (and care): a recompense to one who had been rejected (with scorn)!

ولقد تركناها آية فهل من مدكر
And We have left this as a Sign (for all time): then is there any that will receive admonition?

فكيف كان عذابي ونذر
But how (terrible) was My Penalty and My Warning?

ولقد يسرنا القرآن للذكر فهل من مدكر
And We have indeed made the Qur'an easy to understand and remember: then is there any that will receive admonition?

كذبت عاد فكيف كان عذابي ونذر
The 'Ad (people) (too) rejected (Truth): then how terrible was My Penalty and My Warning?

إنا أرسلنا عليهم ريحا صرصرا في يوم نحس مستمر
For We sent against them a furious wind, on a Day of violent Disaster,

تنزع الناس كأنهم أعجاز نخل منقعر
Plucking out men as if they were roots of palm-trees torn up (from the ground).

فكيف كان عذابي ونذر
Yea, how (terrible) was My Penalty and My Warning!

ولقد يسرنا القرآن للذكر فهل من مدكر
But We have indeed made the Qur'an easy to understand and remember: then is there any that will receive admonition?

كذبت ثمود بالنذر
The Thamud (also) rejected (their) Warners.

فقالوا أبشرا منا واحدا نتبعه إنا إذا لفي ضلال وسعر
For they said: "What! a man! a Solitary one from among ourselves! shall we follow such a one? Truly should we then be straying in mind, and mad!

أألقي الذكر عليه من بيننا بل هو كذاب أشر
"Is it that the Message is sent to him, of all people amongst us? Nay, he is a liar, an insolent one!"

سيعلمون غدا من الكذاب الأشر
Ah! they will know on the morrow, which is the liar, the insolent one!

إنا مرسلو الناقة فتنة لهم فارتقبهم واصطبر
For We will send the she-camel by way of trial for them. So watch them, (O Salih), and possess thyself in patience!

ونبئهم أن الماء قسمة بينهم كل شرب محتضر
And tell them that the water is to be divided between them: Each one's right to drink being brought forward (by suitable turns).

فنادوا صاحبهم فتعاطى فعقر
But they called to their companion, and he took a sword in hand, and hamstrung (her).

فكيف كان عذابي ونذر
Ah! how (terrible) was My Penalty and My Warning!

إنا أرسلنا عليهم صيحة واحدة فكانوا كهشيم المحتظر
For We sent against them a single Mighty Blast, and they became like the dry stubble used by one who pens cattle.

ولقد يسرنا القرآن للذكر فهل من مدكر
And We have indeed made the Qur'an easy to understand and remember: then is there any that will receive admonition?

كذبت قوم لوط بالنذر
The people of Lut rejected (his) warning.

إنا أرسلنا عليهم حاصبا إلا آل لوط نجيناهم بسحر
We sent against them a violent Tornado with showers of stones, (which destroyed them), except Lut's household: them We delivered by early Dawn,-

نعمة من عندنا كذلك نجزي من شكر
As a Grace from Us: thus do We reward those who give thanks.

ولقد أنذرهم بطشتنا فتماروا بالنذر
And (Lut) did warn them of Our Punishment, but they disputed about the Warning.

ولقد راودوه عن ضيفه فطمسنا أعينهم فذوقوا عذابي ونذر
And they even sought to snatch away his guests from him, but We blinded their eyes. (They heard:) "Now taste ye My Wrath and My Warning."

ولقد صبحهم بكرة عذاب مستقر
Early on the morrow an abiding Punishment seized them:

فذوقوا عذابي ونذر
"So taste ye My Wrath and My Warning."

ولقد يسرنا القرآن للذكر فهل من مدكر
And We have indeed made the Qur'an easy to understand and remember: then is there any that will receive admonition?

ولقد جاء آل فرعون النذر
To the People of Pharaoh, too, aforetime, came Warners (from Allah).

كذبوا بآياتنا كلها فأخذناهم أخذ عزيز مقتدر
The (people) rejected all Our Signs; but We seized them with such Penalty (as comes) from One Exalted in Power, able to carry out His Will.

أكفاركم خير من أولئكم أم لكم براءة في الزبر
Are your Unbelievers, (O Quraish), better than they? Or have ye an immunity in the Sacred Books?

أم يقولون نحن جميع منتصر
Or do they say: "We acting together can defend ourselves"?

سيهزم الجمع ويولون الدبر
Soon will their multitude be put to flight, and they will show their backs.

بل الساعة موعدهم والساعة أدهى وأمر
Nay, the Hour (of Judgment) is the time promised them (for their full recompense): And that Hour will be most grievous and most bitter.

إن المجرمين في ضلال وسعر
Truly those in sin are the ones straying in mind, and mad.

يوم يسحبون في النار على وجوههم ذوقوا مس سقر
The Day they will be dragged through the Fire on their faces, (they will hear:) "Taste ye the touch of Hell!"

إنا كل شيء خلقناه بقدر
Verily, all things have We created in proportion and measure.

وما أمرنا إلا واحدة كلمح بالبصر
And Our Command is but a single (Act),- like the twinkling of an eye.

ولقد أهلكنا أشياعكم فهل من مدكر
And (oft) in the past, have We destroyed gangs like unto you: then is there any that will receive admonition?

وكل شيء فعلوه في الزبر
All that they do is noted in (their) Books (of Deeds):

وكل صغير وكبير مستطر
Every matter, small and great, is on record.

إن المتقين في جنات ونهر
As to the Righteous, they will be in the midst of Gardens and Rivers,

في مقعد صدق عند مليك مقتدر
In an Assembly of Truth, in the Presence of a Sovereign Omnipotent.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الرحمن
(Allah) Most Gracious!

علم القرآن
It is He Who has taught the Qur'an.

خلق الإنسان
He has created man:

علمه البيان
He has taught him speech (and intelligence).

الشمس والقمر بحسبان
The sun and the moon follow courses (exactly) computed;

والنجم والشجر يسجدان
And the herbs and the trees - both (alike) prostrate in adoration.

والسماء رفعها ووضع الميزان
And the Firmament has He raised high, and He has set up the Balance (of Justice),

ألا تطغوا في الميزان
In order that ye may not transgress (due) balance.

وأقيموا الوزن بالقسط ولا تخسروا الميزان
So establish weight with justice and fall not short in the balance.

والأرض وضعها للأنام
It is He Who has spread out the earth for (His) creatures:

فيها فاكهة والنخل ذات الأكمام
Therein is fruit and date-palms, producing spathes (enclosing dates);

والحب ذو العصف والريحان
Also corn, with (its) leaves and stalk for fodder, and sweet-smelling plants.

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

خلق الإنسان من صلصال كالفخار
He created man from sounding clay like unto pottery,

وخلق الجان من مارج من نار
And He created Jinns from fire free of smoke:

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

رب المشرقين ورب المغربين
(He is) Lord of the two Easts and Lord of the two Wests:

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

مرج البحرين يلتقيان
He has let free the two bodies of flowing water, meeting together:

بينهما برزخ لا يبغيان
Between them is a Barrier which they do not transgress:

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

يخرج منهما اللؤلؤ والمرجان
Out of them come Pearls and Coral:

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

وله الجوار المنشآت في البحر كالأعلام
And His are the Ships sailing smoothly through the seas, lofty as mountains:

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

كل من عليها فان
All that is on earth will perish:

ويبقى وجه ربك ذو الجلال والإكرام
But will abide (for ever) the Face of thy Lord,- full of Majesty, Bounty and Honour.

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

يسأله من في السماوات والأرض كل يوم هو في شأن
Of Him seeks (its need) every creature in the heavens and on earth: every day in (new) Splendour doth He (shine)!

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

سنفرغ لكم أيه الثقلان
Soon shall We settle your affairs, O both ye worlds!

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

يا معشر الجن والإنس إن استطعتم أن تنفذوا من أقطار السماوات والأرض فانفذوا لا تنفذون إلا بسلطان
O ye assembly of Jinns and men! If it be ye can pass beyond the zones of the heavens and the earth, pass ye! not without authority shall ye be able to pass!

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

يرسل عليكما شواظ من نار ونحاس فلا تنتصران
On you will be sent (O ye evil ones twain!) a flame of fire (to burn) and a smoke (to choke): no defence will ye have:

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

فإذا انشقت السماء فكانت وردة كالدهان
When the sky is rent asunder, and it becomes red like ointment:

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

فيومئذ لا يسأل عن ذنبه إنس ولا جان
On that Day no question will be asked of man or Jinn as to his sin.

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

يعرف المجرمون بسيماهم فيؤخذ بالنواصي والأقدام
(For) the sinners will be known by their marks: and they will be seized by their forelocks and their feet.

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

هذه جهنم التي يكذب بها المجرمون
This is the Hell which the Sinners deny:

يطوفون بينها وبين حميم آن
In its midst and in the midst of boiling hot water will they wander round!

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

ولمن خاف مقام ربه جنتان
But for such as fear the time when they will stand before (the Judgment Seat of) their Lord, there will be two Gardens-

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?-

ذواتا أفنان
Containing all kinds (of trees and delights);-

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?-

فيهما عينان تجريان
In them (each) will be two Springs flowing (free);

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?-

فيهما من كل فاكهة زوجان
In them will be Fruits of every kind, two and two.

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

متكئين على فرش بطائنها من إستبرق وجنى الجنتين دان
They will recline on Carpets, whose inner linings will be of rich brocade: the Fruit of the Gardens will be near (and easy of reach).

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

فيهن قاصرات الطرف لم يطمثهن إنس قبلهم ولا جان
In them will be (Maidens), chaste, restraining their glances, whom no man or Jinn before them has touched;-

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?-

كأنهن الياقوت والمرجان
Like unto Rubies and coral.

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

هل جزاء الإحسان إلا الإحسان
Is there any Reward for Good - other than Good?

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

ومن دونهما جنتان
And besides these two, there are two other Gardens,-

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?-

مدهامتان
Dark-green in colour (from plentiful watering).

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

فيهما عينان نضاختان
In them (each) will be two Springs pouring forth water in continuous abundance:

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

فيهما فاكهة ونخل ورمان
In them will be Fruits, and dates and pomegranates:

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

فيهن خيرات حسان
In them will be fair (Companions), good, beautiful;-

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?-

حور مقصورات في الخيام
Companions restrained (as to their glances), in (goodly) pavilions;-

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?-

لم يطمثهن إنس قبلهم ولا جان
Whom no man or Jinn before them has touched;-

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?-

متكئين على رفرف خضر وعبقري حسان
Reclining on green Cushions and rich Carpets of beauty.

فبأي آلاء ربكما تكذبان
Then which of the favours of your Lord will ye deny?

تبارك اسم ربك ذي الجلال والإكرام
Blessed be the name of thy Lord, full of Majesty, Bounty and Honour.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم إذا وقعت الواقعة
When the Event inevitable cometh to pass,

ليس لوقعتها كاذبة
Then will no (soul) entertain falsehood concerning its coming.

خافضة رافعة
(Many) will it bring low; (many) will it exalt;

إذا رجت الأرض رجا
When the earth shall be shaken to its depths,

وبست الجبال بسا
And the mountains shall be crumbled to atoms,

فكانت هباء منبثا
Becoming dust scattered abroad,

وكنتم أزواجا ثلاثة
And ye shall be sorted out into three classes.

فأصحاب الميمنة ما أصحاب الميمنة
Then (there will be) the Companions of the Right Hand;- What will be the Companions of the Right Hand?

وأصحاب المشأمة ما أصحاب المشأمة
And the Companions of the Left Hand,- what will be the Companions of the Left Hand?

والسابقون السابقون
And those Foremost (in Faith) will be Foremost (in the Hereafter).

أولئك المقربون
These will be those Nearest to Allah:

في جنات النعيم
In Gardens of Bliss:

ثلة من الأولين
A number of people from those of old,

وقليل من الآخرين
And a few from those of later times.

على سرر موضونة
(They will be) on Thrones encrusted (with gold and precious stones),

متكئين عليها متقابلين
Reclining on them, facing each other.

يطوف عليهم ولدان مخلدون
Round about them will (serve) youths of perpetual (freshness),

بأكواب وأباريق وكأس من معين
With goblets, (shining) beakers, and cups (filled) out of clear-flowing fountains:

لا يصدعون عنها ولا ينزفون
No after-ache will they receive therefrom, nor will they suffer intoxication:

وفاكهة مما يتخيرون
And with fruits, any that they may select:

ولحم طير مما يشتهون
And the flesh of fowls, any that they may desire.

وحور عين
And (there will be) Companions with beautiful, big, and lustrous eyes,-

كأمثال اللؤلؤ المكنون
Like unto Pearls well-guarded.

جزاء بما كانوا يعملون
A Reward for the deeds of their past (life).

لا يسمعون فيها لغوا ولا تأثيما
Not frivolity will they hear therein, nor any taint of ill,-

إلا قيلا سلاما سلاما
Only the saying, "Peace! Peace".

وأصحاب اليمين ما أصحاب اليمين
The Companions of the Right Hand,- what will be the Companions of the Right Hand?

في سدر مخضود
(They will be) among Lote-trees without thorns,

وطلح منضود
Among Talh trees with flowers (or fruits) piled one above another,-

وظل ممدود
In shade long-extended,

وماء مسكوب
By water flowing constantly,

وفاكهة كثيرة
And fruit in abundance.

لا مقطوعة ولا ممنوعة
Whose season is not limited, nor (supply) forbidden,

وفرش مرفوعة
And on Thrones (of Dignity), raised high.

إنا أنشأناهن إنشاء
We have created (their Companions) of special creation.

فجعلناهن أبكارا
And made them virgin - pure (and undefiled), -

عربا أترابا
Beloved (by nature), equal in age,-

لأصحاب اليمين
For the Companions of the Right Hand.

ثلة من الأولين
A (goodly) number from those of old,

وثلة من الآخرين
And a (goodly) number from those of later times.

وأصحاب الشمال ما أصحاب الشمال
The Companions of the Left Hand,- what will be the Companions of the Left Hand?

في سموم وحميم
(They will be) in the midst of a Fierce Blast of Fire and in Boiling Water,

وظل من يحموم
And in the shades of Black Smoke:

لا بارد ولا كريم
Nothing (will there be) to refresh, nor to please:

إنهم كانوا قبل ذلك مترفين
For that they were wont to be indulged, before that, in wealth (and luxury),

وكانوا يصرون على الحنث العظيم
And persisted obstinately in wickedness supreme!

وكانوا يقولون أئذا متنا وكنا ترابا وعظاما أإنا لمبعوثون
And they used to say, "What! when we die and become dust and bones, shall we then indeed be raised up again?-

أوآباؤنا الأولون
"(We) and our fathers of old?"

قل إن الأولين والآخرين
Say: "Yea, those of old and those of later times,

لمجموعون إلى ميقات يوم معلوم
"All will certainly be gathered together for the meeting appointed for a Day well-known.

ثم إنكم أيها الضالون المكذبون
"Then will ye truly,- O ye that go wrong, and treat (Truth) as Falsehood!-

لآكلون من شجر من زقوم
"Ye will surely taste of the Tree of Zaqqum.

فمالئون منها البطون
"Then will ye fill your insides therewith,

فشاربون عليه من الحميم
"And drink Boiling Water on top of it:

فشاربون شرب الهيم
"Indeed ye shall drink like diseased camels raging with thirst!"

هذا نزلهم يوم الدين
Such will be their entertainment on the Day of Requital!

نحن خلقناكم فلولا تصدقون
It is We Who have created you: why will ye not witness the Truth?

أفرأيتم ما تمنون
Do ye then see?- The (human Seed) that ye throw out,-

أأنتم تخلقونه أم نحن الخالقون
Is it ye who create it, or are We the Creators?

نحن قدرنا بينكم الموت وما نحن بمسبوقين
We have decreed Death to be your common lot, and We are not to be frustrated

على أن نبدل أمثالكم وننشئكم في ما لا تعلمون
from changing your Forms and creating you (again) in (forms) that ye know not.

ولقد علمتم النشأة الأولى فلولا تذكرون
And ye certainly know already the first form of creation: why then do ye not celebrate His praises?

أفرأيتم ما تحرثون
See ye the seed that ye sow in the ground?

أأنتم تزرعونه أم نحن الزارعون
Is it ye that cause it to grow, or are We the Cause?

لو نشاء لجعلناه حطاما فظلتم تفكهون
Were it Our Will, We could crumble it to dry powder, and ye would be left in wonderment,

إنا لمغرمون
(Saying), "We are indeed left with debts (for nothing):

بل نحن محرومون
"Indeed are we shut out (of the fruits of our labour)"

أفرأيتم الماء الذي تشربون
See ye the water which ye drink?

أأنتم أنزلتموه من المزن أم نحن المنزلون
Do ye bring it down (in rain) from the cloud or do We?

لو نشاء جعلناه أجاجا فلولا تشكرون
Were it Our Will, We could make it salt (and unpalatable): then why do ye not give thanks?

أفرأيتم النار التي تورون
See ye the Fire which ye kindle?

أأنتم أنشأتم شجرتها أم نحن المنشئون
Is it ye who grow the tree which feeds the fire, or do We grow it?

نحن جعلناها تذكرة ومتاعا للمقوين
We have made it a memorial (of Our handiwork), and an article of comfort and convenience for the denizens of deserts.

فسبح باسم ربك العظيم
Then celebrate with praises the name of thy Lord, the Supreme!

فلا أقسم بمواقع النجوم
Furthermore I call to witness the setting of the Stars,-

وإنه لقسم لو تعلمون عظيم
And that is indeed a mighty adjuration if ye but knew,-

إنه لقرآن كريم
That this is indeed a qur'an Most Honourable,

في كتاب مكنون
In Book well-guarded,

لا يمسه إلا المطهرون
Which none shall touch but those who are clean:

تنزيل من رب العالمين
A Revelation from the Lord of the Worlds.

أفبهذا الحديث أنتم مدهنون
Is it such a Message that ye would hold in light esteem?

وتجعلون رزقكم أنكم تكذبون
And have ye made it your livelihood that ye should declare it false?

فلولا إذا بلغت الحلقوم
Then why do ye not (intervene) when (the soul of the dying man) reaches the throat,-

وأنتم حينئذ تنظرون
And ye the while (sit) looking on,-

ونحن أقرب إليه منكم ولكن لا تبصرون
But We are nearer to him than ye, and yet see not,-

فلولا إن كنتم غير مدينين
Then why do ye not,- If you are exempt from (future) account,-

ترجعونها إن كنتم صادقين
Call back the soul, if ye are true (in the claim of independence)?

فأما إن كان من المقربين
Thus, then, if he be of those Nearest to Allah,

فروح وريحان وجنت نعيم
(There is for him) Rest and Satisfaction, and a Garden of Delights.

وأما إن كان من أصحاب اليمين
And if he be of the Companions of the Right Hand,

فسلام لك من أصحاب اليمين
(For him is the salutation), "Peace be unto thee", from the Companions of the Right Hand.

وأما إن كان من المكذبين الضالين
And if he be of those who treat (Truth) as Falsehood, who go wrong,

فنزل من حميم
For him is Entertainment with Boiling Water.

وتصلية جحيم
And burning in Hell-Fire.

إن هذا لهو حق اليقين
Verily, this is the Very Truth and Certainly.

فسبح باسم ربك العظيم
So celebrate with praises the name of thy Lord, the Supreme.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم سبح لله ما في السماوات والأرض وهو العزيز الحكيم
Whatever is in the heavens and on earth,- let it declare the Praises and Glory of Allah: for He is the Exalted in Might, the Wise.

له ملك السماوات والأرض يحيي ويميت وهو على كل شيء قدير
To Him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth: It is He Who gives Life and Death; and He has Power over all things.

هو الأول والآخر والظاهر والباطن وهو بكل شيء عليم
He is the First and the Last, the Evident and the Immanent: and He has full knowledge of all things.

هو الذي خلق السماوات والأرض في ستة أيام ثم استوى على العرش يعلم ما يلج في الأرض وما يخرج منها وما ينزل من السماء وما يعرج فيها وهو معكم أين ما كنتم والله بما تعملون بصير
He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in Six Days, and is moreover firmly established on the Throne (of Authority). He knows what enters within the earth and what comes forth out of it, what comes down from heaven and what mounts up to it. And He is with you wheresoever ye may be. And Allah sees well all that ye do.

له ملك السماوات والأرض وإلى الله ترجع الأمور
To Him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth: and all affairs are referred back to Allah.

يولج الليل في النهار ويولج النهار في الليل وهو عليم بذات الصدور
He merges Night into Day, and He merges Day into Night; and He has full knowledge of the secrets of (all) hearts.

آمنوا بالله ورسوله وأنفقوا مما جعلكم مستخلفين فيه فالذين آمنوا منكم وأنفقوا لهم أجر كبير
Believe in Allah and His messenger, and spend (in charity) out of the (substance) whereof He has made you heirs. For, those of you who believe and spend (in charity),- for them is a great Reward.

وما لكم لا تؤمنون بالله والرسول يدعوكم لتؤمنوا بربكم وقد أخذ ميثاقكم إن كنتم مؤمنين
What cause have ye why ye should not believe in Allah?- and the Messenger invites you to believe in your Lord, and has indeed taken your Covenant, if ye are men of Faith.

هو الذي ينزل على عبده آيات بينات ليخرجكم من الظلمات إلى النور وإن الله بكم لرءوف رحيم
He is the One Who sends to His Servant Manifest Signs, that He may lead you from the depths of Darkness into the Light and verily Allah is to you most kind and Merciful.

وما لكم ألا تنفقوا في سبيل الله ولله ميراث السماوات والأرض لا يستوي منكم من أنفق من قبل الفتح وقاتل أولئك أعظم درجة من الذين أنفقوا من بعد وقاتلوا وكلا وعد الله الحسنى والله بما تعملون خبير
And what cause have ye why ye should not spend in the cause of Allah?- For to Allah belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth. Not equal among you are those who spent (freely) and fought, before the Victory, (with those who did so later). Those are higher in rank than those who spent (freely) and fought afterwards. But to all has Allah promised a goodly (reward). And Allah is well acquainted with all that ye do.

من ذا الذي يقرض الله قرضا حسنا فيضاعفه له وله أجر كريم
Who is he that will Loan to Allah a beautiful loan? for (Allah) will increase it manifold to his credit, and he will have (besides) a liberal Reward.

يوم ترى المؤمنين والمؤمنات يسعى نورهم بين أيديهم وبأيمانهم بشراكم اليوم جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها ذلك هو الفوز العظيم
One Day shalt thou see the believing men and the believing women- how their Light runs forward before them and by their right hands: (their greeting will be): "Good News for you this Day! Gardens beneath which flow rivers! to dwell therein for aye! This is indeed the highest Achievement!"

يوم يقول المنافقون والمنافقات للذين آمنوا انظرونا نقتبس من نوركم قيل ارجعوا وراءكم فالتمسوا نورا فضرب بينهم بسور له باب باطنه فيه الرحمة وظاهره من قبله العذاب
One Day will the Hypocrites- men and women - say to the Believers: "Wait for us! Let us borrow (a Light) from your Light!" It will be said: "Turn ye back to your rear! then seek a Light (where ye can)!" So a wall will be put up betwixt them, with a gate therein. Within it will be Mercy throughout, and without it, all alongside, will be (Wrath and) Punishment!

ينادونهم ألم نكن معكم قالوا بلى ولكنكم فتنتم أنفسكم وتربصتم وارتبتم وغرتكم الأماني حتى جاء أمر الله وغركم بالله الغرور
(Those without) will call out, "Were we not with you?" (The others) will reply, "True! but ye led yourselves into temptation; ye looked forward (to our ruin); ye doubted (Allah's Promise); and (your false) desires deceived you; until there issued the Command of Allah. And the Deceiver deceived you in respect of Allah.

فاليوم لا يؤخذ منكم فدية ولا من الذين كفروا مأواكم النار هي مولاكم وبئس المصير
"This Day shall no ransom be accepted of you, nor of those who rejected Allah." Your abode is the Fire: that is the proper place to claim you: and an evil refuge it is!"

ألم يأن للذين آمنوا أن تخشع قلوبهم لذكر الله وما نزل من الحق ولا يكونوا كالذين أوتوا الكتاب من قبل فطال عليهم الأمد فقست قلوبهم وكثير منهم فاسقون
Has not the Time arrived for the Believers that their hearts in all humility should engage in the remembrance of Allah and of the Truth which has been revealed (to them), and that they should not become like those to whom was given Revelation aforetime, but long ages passed over them and their hearts grew hard? For many among them are rebellious transgressors.

اعلموا أن الله يحيي الأرض بعد موتها قد بينا لكم الآيات لعلكم تعقلون
Know ye (all) that Allah giveth life to the earth after its death! already have We shown the Signs plainly to you, that ye may learn wisdom.

إن المصدقين والمصدقات وأقرضوا الله قرضا حسنا يضاعف لهم ولهم أجر كريم
For those who give in Charity, men and women, and loan to Allah a Beautiful Loan, it shall be increased manifold (to their credit), and they shall have (besides) a liberal reward.

والذين آمنوا بالله ورسله أولئك هم الصديقون والشهداء عند ربهم لهم أجرهم ونورهم والذين كفروا وكذبوا بآياتنا أولئك أصحاب الجحيم
And those who believe in Allah and His messengers- they are the Sincere (lovers of Truth), and the witnesses (who testify), in the eyes of their Lord: They shall have their Reward and their Light. But those who reject Allah and deny Our Signs,- they are the Companions of Hell-Fire.

اعلموا أنما الحياة الدنيا لعب ولهو وزينة وتفاخر بينكم وتكاثر في الأموال والأولاد كمثل غيث أعجب الكفار نباته ثم يهيج فتراه مصفرا ثم يكون حطاما وفي الآخرة عذاب شديد ومغفرة من الله ورضوان وما الحياة الدنيا إلا متاع الغرور
Know ye (all), that the life of this world is but play and amusement, pomp and mutual boasting and multiplying, (in rivalry) among yourselves, riches and children. Here is a similitude: How rain and the growth which it brings forth, delight (the hearts of) the tillers; soon it withers; thou wilt see it grow yellow; then it becomes dry and crumbles away. But in the Hereafter is a Penalty severe (for the devotees of wrong). And Forgiveness from Allah and (His) Good Pleasure (for the devotees of Allah). And what is the life of this world, but goods and chattels of deception?

سابقوا إلى مغفرة من ربكم وجنة عرضها كعرض السماء والأرض أعدت للذين آمنوا بالله ورسله ذلك فضل الله يؤتيه من يشاء والله ذو الفضل العظيم
Be ye foremost (in seeking) Forgiveness from your Lord, and a Garden (of Bliss), the width whereof is as the width of heaven and earth, prepared for those who believe in Allah and His messengers: that is the Grace of Allah, which He bestows on whom he pleases: and Allah is the Lord of Grace abounding.

ما أصاب من مصيبة في الأرض ولا في أنفسكم إلا في كتاب من قبل أن نبرأها إن ذلك على الله يسير
No misfortune can happen on earth or in your souls but is recorded in a decree before We bring it into existence: That is truly easy for Allah:

لكيلا تأسوا على ما فاتكم ولا تفرحوا بما آتاكم والله لا يحب كل مختال فخور
In order that ye may not despair over matters that pass you by, nor exult over favours bestowed upon you. For Allah loveth not any vainglorious boaster,-

الذين يبخلون ويأمرون الناس بالبخل ومن يتول فإن الله هو الغني الحميد
Such persons as are covetous and commend covetousness to men. And if any turn back (from Allah's Way), verily Allah is Free of all Needs, Worthy of all Praise.

لقد أرسلنا رسلنا بالبينات وأنزلنا معهم الكتاب والميزان ليقوم الناس بالقسط وأنزلنا الحديد فيه بأس شديد ومنافع للناس وليعلم الله من ينصره ورسله بالغيب إن الله قوي عزيز
We sent aforetime our messengers with Clear Signs and sent down with them the Book and the Balance (of Right and Wrong), that men may stand forth in justice; and We sent down Iron, in which is (material for) mighty war, as well as many benefits for mankind, that Allah may test who it is that will help, Unseen, Him and His messengers: For Allah is Full of Strength, Exalted in Might (and able to enforce His Will).

ولقد أرسلنا نوحا وإبراهيم وجعلنا في ذريتهما النبوة والكتاب فمنهم مهتد وكثير منهم فاسقون
And We sent Noah and Abraham, and established in their line Prophethood and Revelation: and some of them were on right guidance. But many of them became rebellious transgressors.

ثم قفينا على آثارهم برسلنا وقفينا بعيسى ابن مريم وآتيناه الإنجيل وجعلنا في قلوب الذين اتبعوه رأفة ورحمة ورهبانية ابتدعوها ما كتبناها عليهم إلا ابتغاء رضوان الله فما رعوها حق رعايتها فآتينا الذين آمنوا منهم أجرهم وكثير منهم فاسقون
Then, in their wake, We followed them up with (others of) Our messengers: We sent after them Jesus the son of Mary, and bestowed on him the Gospel; and We ordained in the hearts of those who followed him Compassion and Mercy. But the Monasticism which they invented for themselves, We did not prescribe for them: (We commanded) only the seeking for the Good Pleasure of Allah; but that they did not foster as they should have done. Yet We bestowed, on those among them who believed, their (due) reward, but many of them are rebellious transgressors.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا اتقوا الله وآمنوا برسوله يؤتكم كفلين من رحمته ويجعل لكم نورا تمشون به ويغفر لكم والله غفور رحيم
O ye that believe! Fear Allah, and believe in His Messenger, and He will bestow on you a double portion of His Mercy: He will provide for you a Light by which ye shall walk (straight in your path), and He will forgive you (your past): for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

لئلا يعلم أهل الكتاب ألا يقدرون على شيء من فضل الله وأن الفضل بيد الله يؤتيه من يشاء والله ذو الفضل العظيم
That the People of the Book may know that they have no power whatever over the Grace of Allah, that (His) Grace is (entirely) in His Hand, to bestow it on whomsoever He wills. For Allah is the Lord of Grace abounding.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم قد سمع الله قول التي تجادلك في زوجها وتشتكي إلى الله والله يسمع تحاوركما إن الله سميع بصير
Allah has indeed heard (and accepted) the statement of the woman who pleads with thee concerning her husband and carries her complaint (in prayer) to Allah: and Allah (always) hears the arguments between both sides among you: for Allah hears and sees (all things).

الذين يظاهرون منكم من نسائهم ما هن أمهاتهم إن أمهاتهم إلا اللائي ولدنهم وإنهم ليقولون منكرا من القول وزورا وإن الله لعفو غفور
If any men among you divorce their wives by Zihar (calling them mothers), they cannot be their mothers: None can be their mothers except those who gave them birth. And in fact they use words (both) iniquitous and false: but truly Allah is one that blots out (sins), and forgives (again and again).

والذين يظاهرون من نسائهم ثم يعودون لما قالوا فتحرير رقبة من قبل أن يتماسا ذلكم توعظون به والله بما تعملون خبير
But those who divorce their wives by Zihar, then wish to go back on the words they uttered,- (It is ordained that such a one) should free a slave before they touch each other: Thus are ye admonished to perform: and Allah is well-acquainted with (all) that ye do.

فمن لم يجد فصيام شهرين متتابعين من قبل أن يتماسا فمن لم يستطع فإطعام ستين مسكينا ذلك لتؤمنوا بالله ورسوله وتلك حدود الله وللكافرين عذاب أليم
And if any has not (the wherewithal), he should fast for two months consecutively before they touch each other. But if any is unable to do so, he should feed sixty indigent ones, this, that ye may show your faith in Allah and His Messenger. Those are limits (set by) Allah. For those who reject (Him), there is a grievous Penalty.

إن الذين يحادون الله ورسوله كبتوا كما كبت الذين من قبلهم وقد أنزلنا آيات بينات وللكافرين عذاب مهين
Those who resist Allah and His Messenger will be humbled to dust, as were those before them: for We have already sent down Clear Signs. And the Unbelievers (will have) a humiliating Penalty,-

يوم يبعثهم الله جميعا فينبئهم بما عملوا أحصاه الله ونسوه والله على كل شيء شهيد
On the Day that Allah will raise them all up (again) and show them the Truth (and meaning) of their conduct. Allah has reckoned its (value), though they may have forgotten it, for Allah is Witness to all things.

ألم تر أن الله يعلم ما في السماوات وما في الأرض ما يكون من نجوى ثلاثة إلا هو رابعهم ولا خمسة إلا هو سادسهم ولا أدنى من ذلك ولا أكثر إلا هو معهم أين ما كانوا ثم ينبئهم بما عملوا يوم القيامة إن الله بكل شيء عليم
Seest thou not that Allah doth know (all) that is in the heavens and on earth? There is not a secret consultation between three, but He makes the fourth among them, - Nor between five but He makes the sixth,- nor between fewer nor more, but He is in their midst, wheresoever they be: In the end will He tell them the truth of their conduct, on the Day of Judgment. For Allah has full knowledge of all things.

ألم تر إلى الذين نهوا عن النجوى ثم يعودون لما نهوا عنه ويتناجون بالإثم والعدوان ومعصيت الرسول وإذا جاءوك حيوك بما لم يحيك به الله ويقولون في أنفسهم لولا يعذبنا الله بما نقول حسبهم جهنم يصلونها فبئس المصير
Turnest thou not thy sight towards those who were forbidden secret counsels yet revert to that which they were forbidden (to do)? And they hold secret counsels among themselves for iniquity and hostility, and disobedience to the Messenger. And when they come to thee, they salute thee, not as Allah salutes thee, (but in crooked ways): And they say to themselves, "Why does not Allah punish us for our words?" Enough for them is Hell: In it will they burn, and evil is that destination!

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إذا تناجيتم فلا تتناجوا بالإثم والعدوان ومعصيت الرسول وتناجوا بالبر والتقوى واتقوا الله الذي إليه تحشرون
O ye who believe! When ye hold secret counsel, do it not for iniquity and hostility, and disobedience to the Prophet; but do it for righteousness and self-restraint; and fear Allah, to Whom ye shall be brought back.

إنما النجوى من الشيطان ليحزن الذين آمنوا وليس بضارهم شيئا إلا بإذن الله وعلى الله فليتوكل المؤمنون
Secret counsels are only (inspired) by the Evil One, in order that he may cause grief to the Believers; but he cannot harm them in the least, except as Allah permits; and on Allah let the Believers put their trust.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إذا قيل لكم تفسحوا في المجالس فافسحوا يفسح الله لكم وإذا قيل انشزوا فانشزوا يرفع الله الذين آمنوا منكم والذين أوتوا العلم درجات والله بما تعملون خبير
O ye who believe! When ye are told to make room in the assemblies, (spread out and) make room: (ample) room will Allah provide for you. And when ye are told to rise up, rise up Allah will rise up, to (suitable) ranks (and degrees), those of you who believe and who have been granted (mystic) Knowledge. And Allah is well-acquainted with all ye do.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إذا ناجيتم الرسول فقدموا بين يدي نجواكم صدقة ذلك خير لكم وأطهر فإن لم تجدوا فإن الله غفور رحيم
O ye who believe! When ye consult the Messenger in private, spend something in charity before your private consultation. That will be best for you, and most conducive to purity (of conduct). But if ye find not (the wherewithal), Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

أأشفقتم أن تقدموا بين يدي نجواكم صدقات فإذ لم تفعلوا وتاب الله عليكم فأقيموا الصلاة وآتوا الزكاة وأطيعوا الله ورسوله والله خبير بما تعملون
Is it that ye are afraid of spending sums in charity before your private consultation (with him)? If, then, ye do not so, and Allah forgives you, then (at least) establish regular prayer; practise regular charity; and obey Allah and His Messenger. And Allah is well-acquainted with all that ye do.

ألم تر إلى الذين تولوا قوما غضب الله عليهم ما هم منكم ولا منهم ويحلفون على الكذب وهم يعلمون
Turnest thou not thy attention to those who turn (in friendship) to such as have the Wrath of Allah upon them? They are neither of you nor of them, and they swear to falsehood knowingly.

أعد الله لهم عذابا شديدا إنهم ساء ما كانوا يعملون
Allah has prepared for them a severe Penalty: evil indeed are their deeds.

اتخذوا أيمانهم جنة فصدوا عن سبيل الله فلهم عذاب مهين
They have made their oaths a screen (for their misdeeds): thus they obstruct (men) from the Path of Allah: therefore shall they have a humiliating Penalty.

لن تغني عنهم أموالهم ولا أولادهم من الله شيئا أولئك أصحاب النار هم فيها خالدون
Of no profit whatever to them, against Allah, will be their riches nor their sons: they will be Companions of the Fire, to dwell therein (for aye)!

يوم يبعثهم الله جميعا فيحلفون له كما يحلفون لكم ويحسبون أنهم على شيء ألا إنهم هم الكاذبون
One day will Allah raise them all up (for Judgment): then will they swear to Him as they swear to you: And they think that they have something (to stand upon). No, indeed! they are but liars!

استحوذ عليهم الشيطان فأنساهم ذكر الله أولئك حزب الشيطان ألا إن حزب الشيطان هم الخاسرون
The Evil One has got the better of them: so he has made them lose the remembrance of Allah. They are the Party of the Evil One. Truly, it is the Party of the Evil One that will perish!

إن الذين يحادون الله ورسوله أولئك في الأذلين
Those who resist Allah and His Messenger will be among those most humiliated.

كتب الله لأغلبن أنا ورسلي إن الله قوي عزيز
Allah has decreed: "It is I and My messengers who must prevail": For Allah is One full of strength, able to enforce His Will.

لا تجد قوما يؤمنون بالله واليوم الآخر يوادون من حاد الله ورسوله ولو كانوا آباءهم أو أبناءهم أو إخوانهم أو عشيرتهم أولئك كتب في قلوبهم الإيمان وأيدهم بروح منه ويدخلهم جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها رضي الله عنهم ورضوا عنه أولئك حزب الله ألا إن حزب الله هم المفلحون
Thou wilt not find any people who believe in Allah and the Last Day, loving those who resist Allah and His Messenger, even though they were their fathers or their sons, or their brothers, or their kindred. For such He has written Faith in their hearts, and strengthened them with a spirit from Himself. And He will admit them to Gardens beneath which Rivers flow, to dwell therein (for ever). Allah will be well pleased with them, and they with Him. They are the Party of Allah. Truly it is the Party of Allah that will achieve Felicity.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم سبح لله ما في السماوات وما في الأرض وهو العزيز الحكيم
Whatever is in the heavens and on earth, let it declare the Praises and Glory of Allah: for He is the Exalted in Might, the Wise.

هو الذي أخرج الذين كفروا من أهل الكتاب من ديارهم لأول الحشر ما ظننتم أن يخرجوا وظنوا أنهم مانعتهم حصونهم من الله فأتاهم الله من حيث لم يحتسبوا وقذف في قلوبهم الرعب يخربون بيوتهم بأيديهم وأيدي المؤمنين فاعتبروا يا أولي الأبصار
It is He Who got out the Unbelievers among the People of the Book from their homes at the first gathering (of the forces). Little did ye think that they would get out: And they thought that their fortresses would defend them from Allah! But the (Wrath of) Allah came to them from quarters from which they little expected (it), and cast terror into their hearts, so that they destroyed their dwellings by their own hands and the hands of the Believers, take warning, then, O ye with eyes (to see)!

ولولا أن كتب الله عليهم الجلاء لعذبهم في الدنيا ولهم في الآخرة عذاب النار
And had it not been that Allah had decreed banishment for them, He would certainly have punished them in this world: And in the Hereafter they shall (certainly) have the Punishment of the Fire.

ذلك بأنهم شاقوا الله ورسوله ومن يشاق الله فإن الله شديد العقاب
That is because they resisted Allah and His Messenger: and if any one resists Allah, verily Allah is severe in Punishment.

ما قطعتم من لينة أو تركتموها قائمة على أصولها فبإذن الله وليخزي الفاسقين
Whether ye cut down (O ye Muslim!) The tender palm-trees, or ye left them standing on their roots, it was by leave of Allah, and in order that He might cover with shame the rebellious transgresses.

وما أفاء الله على رسوله منهم فما أوجفتم عليه من خيل ولا ركاب ولكن الله يسلط رسله على من يشاء والله على كل شيء قدير
What Allah has bestowed on His Messenger (and taken away) from them - for this ye made no expedition with either cavalry or camelry: but Allah gives power to His messengers over any He pleases: and Allah has power over all things.

ما أفاء الله على رسوله من أهل القرى فلله وللرسول ولذي القربى واليتامى والمساكين وابن السبيل كي لا يكون دولة بين الأغنياء منكم وما آتاكم الرسول فخذوه وما نهاكم عنه فانتهوا واتقوا الله إن الله شديد العقاب
What Allah has bestowed on His Messenger (and taken away) from the people of the townships,- belongs to Allah,- to His Messenger and to kindred and orphans, the needy and the wayfarer; In order that it may not (merely) make a circuit between the wealthy among you. So take what the Messenger assigns to you, and deny yourselves that which he withholds from you. And fear Allah; for Allah is strict in Punishment.

للفقراء المهاجرين الذين أخرجوا من ديارهم وأموالهم يبتغون فضلا من الله ورضوانا وينصرون الله ورسوله أولئك هم الصادقون
(Some part is due) to the indigent Muhajirs, those who were expelled from their homes and their property, while seeking Grace from Allah and (His) Good Pleasure, and aiding Allah and His Messenger: such are indeed the sincere ones:-

والذين تبوءوا الدار والإيمان من قبلهم يحبون من هاجر إليهم ولا يجدون في صدورهم حاجة مما أوتوا ويؤثرون على أنفسهم ولو كان بهم خصاصة ومن يوق شح نفسه فأولئك هم المفلحون
But those who before them, had homes (in Medina) and had adopted the Faith,- show their affection to such as came to them for refuge, and entertain no desire in their hearts for things given to the (latter), but give them preference over themselves, even though poverty was their (own lot). And those saved from the covetousness of their own souls,- they are the ones that achieve prosperity.

والذين جاءوا من بعدهم يقولون ربنا اغفر لنا ولإخواننا الذين سبقونا بالإيمان ولا تجعل في قلوبنا غلا للذين آمنوا ربنا إنك رءوف رحيم
And those who came after them say: "Our Lord! Forgive us, and our brethren who came before us into the Faith, and leave not, in our hearts, rancour (or sense of injury) against those who have believed. Our Lord! Thou art indeed Full of Kindness, Most Merciful."

ألم تر إلى الذين نافقوا يقولون لإخوانهم الذين كفروا من أهل الكتاب لئن أخرجتم لنخرجن معكم ولا نطيع فيكم أحدا أبدا وإن قوتلتم لننصرنكم والله يشهد إنهم لكاذبون
Hast thou not observed the Hypocrites say to their misbelieving brethren among the People of the Book? - "If ye are expelled, we too will go out with you, and we will never hearken to any one in your affair; and if ye are attacked (in fight) we will help you". But Allah is witness that they are indeed liars.

لئن أخرجوا لا يخرجون معهم ولئن قوتلوا لا ينصرونهم ولئن نصروهم ليولن الأدبار ثم لا ينصرون
If they are expelled, never will they go out with them; and if they are attacked (in fight), they will never help them; and if they do help them, they will turn their backs; so they will receive no help.

لأنتم أشد رهبة في صدورهم من الله ذلك بأنهم قوم لا يفقهون
Of a truth ye are stronger (than they) because of the terror in their hearts, (sent) by Allah. This is because they are men devoid of understanding.

لا يقاتلونكم جميعا إلا في قرى محصنة أو من وراء جدر بأسهم بينهم شديد تحسبهم جميعا وقلوبهم شتى ذلك بأنهم قوم لا يعقلون
They will not fight you (even) together, except in fortified townships, or from behind walls. Strong is their fighting (spirit) amongst themselves: thou wouldst think they were united, but their hearts are divided: that is because they are a people devoid of wisdom.

كمثل الذين من قبلهم قريبا ذاقوا وبال أمرهم ولهم عذاب أليم
Like those who lately preceded them, they have tasted the evil result of their conduct; and (in the Hereafter there is) for them a grievous Penalty;-

كمثل الشيطان إذ قال للإنسان اكفر فلما كفر قال إني بريء منك إني أخاف الله رب العالمين
(Their allies deceived them), like the Evil One, when he says to man, "Deny Allah": but when (man) denies Allah, (the Evil One) says, "I am free of thee: I do fear Allah, the Lord of the Worlds!"

فكان عاقبتهما أنهما في النار خالدين فيها وذلك جزاء الظالمين
The end of both will be that they will go into the Fire, dwelling therein for ever. Such is the reward of the wrong-doers.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا اتقوا الله ولتنظر نفس ما قدمت لغد واتقوا الله إن الله خبير بما تعملون
O ye who believe! Fear Allah, and let every soul look to what (provision) He has sent forth for the morrow. Yea, fear Allah: for Allah is well-acquainted with (all) that ye do.

ولا تكونوا كالذين نسوا الله فأنساهم أنفسهم أولئك هم الفاسقون
And be ye not like those who forgot Allah; and He made them forget their own souls! Such are the rebellious transgressors!

لا يستوي أصحاب النار وأصحاب الجنة أصحاب الجنة هم الفائزون
Not equal are the Companions of the Fire and the Companions of the Garden: it is the Companions of the Garden, that will achieve Felicity.

لو أنزلنا هذا القرآن على جبل لرأيته خاشعا متصدعا من خشية الله وتلك الأمثال نضربها للناس لعلهم يتفكرون
Had We sent down this Qur'an on a mountain, verily, thou wouldst have seen it humble itself and cleave asunder for fear of Allah. Such are the similitudes which We propound to men, that they may reflect.

هو الله الذي لا إله إلا هو عالم الغيب والشهادة هو الرحمن الرحيم
Allah is He, than Whom there is no other god;- Who knows (all things) both secret and open; He, Most Gracious, Most Merciful.

هو الله الذي لا إله إلا هو الملك القدوس السلام المؤمن المهيمن العزيز الجبار المتكبر سبحان الله عما يشركون
Allah is He, than Whom there is no other god;- the Sovereign, the Holy One, the Source of Peace (and Perfection), the Guardian of Faith, the Preserver of Safety, the Exalted in Might, the Irresistible, the Supreme: Glory to Allah! (High is He) above the partners they attribute to Him.

هو الله الخالق البارئ المصور له الأسماء الحسنى يسبح له ما في السماوات والأرض وهو العزيز الحكيم
He is Allah, the Creator, the Evolver, the Bestower of Forms (or Colours). To Him belong the Most Beautiful Names: whatever is in the heavens and on earth, doth declare His Praises and Glory: and He is the Exalted in Might, the Wise.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تتخذوا عدوي وعدوكم أولياء تلقون إليهم بالمودة وقد كفروا بما جاءكم من الحق يخرجون الرسول وإياكم أن تؤمنوا بالله ربكم إن كنتم خرجتم جهادا في سبيلي وابتغاء مرضاتي تسرون إليهم بالمودة وأنا أعلم بما أخفيتم وما أعلنتم ومن يفعله منكم فقد ضل سواء السبيل
O ye who believe! Take not my enemies and yours as friends (or protectors),- offering them (your) love, even though they have rejected the Truth that has come to you, and have (on the contrary) driven out the Prophet and yourselves (from your homes), (simply) because ye believe in Allah your Lord! If ye have come out to strive in My Way and to seek My Good Pleasure, (take them not as friends), holding secret converse of love (and friendship) with them: for I know full well all that ye conceal and all that ye reveal. And any of you that does this has strayed from the Straight Path.

إن يثقفوكم يكونوا لكم أعداء ويبسطوا إليكم أيديهم وألسنتهم بالسوء وودوا لو تكفرون
If they were to get the better of you, they would behave to you as enemies, and stretch forth their hands and their tongues against you for evil: and they desire that ye should reject the Truth.

لن تنفعكم أرحامكم ولا أولادكم يوم القيامة يفصل بينكم والله بما تعملون بصير
Of no profit to you will be your relatives and your children on the Day of Judgment: He will judge between you: for Allah sees well all that ye do.

قد كانت لكم أسوة حسنة في إبراهيم والذين معه إذ قالوا لقومهم إنا برآء منكم ومما تعبدون من دون الله كفرنا بكم وبدا بيننا وبينكم العداوة والبغضاء أبدا حتى تؤمنوا بالله وحده إلا قول إبراهيم لأبيه لأستغفرن لك وما أملك لك من الله من شيء ربنا عليك توكلنا وإليك أنبنا وإليك المصير
There is for you an excellent example (to follow) in Abraham and those with him, when they said to their people: "We are clear of you and of whatever ye worship besides Allah: we have rejected you, and there has arisen, between us and you, enmity and hatred for ever,- unless ye believe in Allah and Him alone": But not when Abraham said to his father: "I will pray for forgiveness for thee, though I have no power (to get) aught on thy behalf from Allah." (They prayed): "Our Lord! in Thee do we trust, and to Thee do we turn in repentance: to Thee is (our) Final Goal.

ربنا لا تجعلنا فتنة للذين كفروا واغفر لنا ربنا إنك أنت العزيز الحكيم
"Our Lord! Make us not a (test and) trial for the Unbelievers, but forgive us, our Lord! for Thou art the Exalted in Might, the Wise."

لقد كان لكم فيهم أسوة حسنة لمن كان يرجو الله واليوم الآخر ومن يتول فإن الله هو الغني الحميد
There was indeed in them an excellent example for you to follow,- for those whose hope is in Allah and in the Last Day. But if any turn away, truly Allah is Free of all Wants, Worthy of all Praise.

عسى الله أن يجعل بينكم وبين الذين عاديتم منهم مودة والله قدير والله غفور رحيم
It may be that Allah will grant love (and friendship) between you and those whom ye (now) hold as enemies. For Allah has power (over all things); And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

لا ينهاكم الله عن الذين لم يقاتلوكم في الدين ولم يخرجوكم من دياركم أن تبروهم وتقسطوا إليهم إن الله يحب المقسطين
Allah forbids you not, with regard to those who fight you not for (your) Faith nor drive you out of your homes, from dealing kindly and justly with them: for Allah loveth those who are just.

إنما ينهاكم الله عن الذين قاتلوكم في الدين وأخرجوكم من دياركم وظاهروا على إخراجكم أن تولوهم ومن يتولهم فأولئك هم الظالمون
Allah only forbids you, with regard to those who fight you for (your) Faith, and drive you out of your homes, and support (others) in driving you out, from turning to them (for friendship and protection). It is such as turn to them (in these circumstances), that do wrong.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إذا جاءكم المؤمنات مهاجرات فامتحنوهن الله أعلم بإيمانهن فإن علمتموهن مؤمنات فلا ترجعوهن إلى الكفار لا هن حل لهم ولا هم يحلون لهن وآتوهم ما أنفقوا ولا جناح عليكم أن تنكحوهن إذا آتيتموهن أجورهن ولا تمسكوا بعصم الكوافر واسألوا ما أنفقتم وليسألوا ما أنفقوا ذلكم حكم الله يحكم بينكم والله عليم حكيم
O ye who believe! When there come to you believing women refugees, examine (and test) them: Allah knows best as to their Faith: if ye ascertain that they are Believers, then send them not back to the Unbelievers. They are not lawful (wives) for the Unbelievers, nor are the (Unbelievers) lawful (husbands) for them. But pay the Unbelievers what they have spent (on their dower), and there will be no blame on you if ye marry them on payment of their dower to them. But hold not to the guardianship of unbelieving women: ask for what ye have spent on their dowers, and let the (Unbelievers) ask for what they have spent (on the dowers of women who come over to you). Such is the command of Allah: He judges (with justice) between you. And Allah is Full of Knowledge and Wisdom.

وإن فاتكم شيء من أزواجكم إلى الكفار فعاقبتم فآتوا الذين ذهبت أزواجهم مثل ما أنفقوا واتقوا الله الذي أنتم به مؤمنون
And if any of your wives deserts you to the Unbelievers, and ye have an accession (by the coming over of a woman from the other side), then pay to those whose wives have deserted the equivalent of what they had spent (on their dower). And fear Allah, in Whom ye believe.

يا أيها النبي إذا جاءك المؤمنات يبايعنك على أن لا يشركن بالله شيئا ولا يسرقن ولا يزنين ولا يقتلن أولادهن ولا يأتين ببهتان يفترينه بين أيديهن وأرجلهن ولا يعصينك في معروف فبايعهن واستغفر لهن الله إن الله غفور رحيم
O Prophet! When believing women come to thee to take the oath of fealty to thee, that they will not associate in worship any other thing whatever with Allah, that they will not steal, that they will not commit adultery (or fornication), that they will not kill their children, that they will not utter slander, intentionally forging falsehood, and that they will not disobey thee in any just matter,- then do thou receive their fealty, and pray to Allah for the forgiveness (of their sins): for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تتولوا قوما غضب الله عليهم قد يئسوا من الآخرة كما يئس الكفار من أصحاب القبور
O ye who believe! Turn not (for friendship) to people on whom is the Wrath of Allah, of the Hereafter they are already in despair, just as the Unbelievers are in despair about those (buried) in graves.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم سبح لله ما في السماوات وما في الأرض وهو العزيز الحكيم
Whatever is in the heavens and on earth, let it declare the Praises and Glory of Allah: for He is the Exalted in Might, the Wise.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لم تقولون ما لا تفعلون
O ye who believe! Why say ye that which ye do not?

كبر مقتا عند الله أن تقولوا ما لا تفعلون
Grievously odious is it in the sight of Allah that ye say that which ye do not.

إن الله يحب الذين يقاتلون في سبيله صفا كأنهم بنيان مرصوص
Truly Allah loves those who fight in His Cause in battle array, as if they were a solid cemented structure.

وإذ قال موسى لقومه يا قوم لم تؤذونني وقد تعلمون أني رسول الله إليكم فلما زاغوا أزاغ الله قلوبهم والله لا يهدي القوم الفاسقين
And remember, Moses said to his people: "O my people! why do ye vex and insult me, though ye know that I am the messenger of Allah (sent) to you?" Then when they went wrong, Allah let their hearts go wrong. For Allah guides not those who are rebellious transgressors.

وإذ قال عيسى ابن مريم يا بني إسرائيل إني رسول الله إليكم مصدقا لما بين يدي من التوراة ومبشرا برسول يأتي من بعدي اسمه أحمد فلما جاءهم بالبينات قالوا هذا سحر مبين
And remember, Jesus, the son of Mary, said: "O Children of Israel! I am the messenger of Allah (sent) to you, confirming the Law (which came) before me, and giving Glad Tidings of a Messenger to come after me, whose name shall be Ahmad." But when he came to them with Clear Signs, they said, "this is evident sorcery!"

ومن أظلم ممن افترى على الله الكذب وهو يدعى إلى الإسلام والله لا يهدي القوم الظالمين
Who doth greater wrong than one who invents falsehood against Allah, even as he is being invited to Islam? And Allah guides not those who do wrong.

يريدون ليطفئوا نور الله بأفواههم والله متم نوره ولو كره الكافرون
Their intention is to extinguish Allah's Light (by blowing) with their mouths: But Allah will complete (the revelation of) His Light, even though the Unbelievers may detest (it).

هو الذي أرسل رسوله بالهدى ودين الحق ليظهره على الدين كله ولو كره المشركون
It is He Who has sent His Messenger with Guidance and the Religion of Truth, that he may proclaim it over all religion, even though the Pagans may detest (it).

يا أيها الذين آمنوا هل أدلكم على تجارة تنجيكم من عذاب أليم
O ye who believe! Shall I lead you to a bargain that will save you from a grievous Penalty?-

تؤمنون بالله ورسوله وتجاهدون في سبيل الله بأموالكم وأنفسكم ذلكم خير لكم إن كنتم تعلمون
That ye believe in Allah and His Messenger, and that ye strive (your utmost) in the Cause of Allah, with your property and your persons: That will be best for you, if ye but knew!

يغفر لكم ذنوبكم ويدخلكم جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار ومساكن طيبة في جنات عدن ذلك الفوز العظيم
He will forgive you your sins, and admit you to Gardens beneath which Rivers flow, and to beautiful mansions in Gardens of Eternity: that is indeed the Supreme Achievement.

وأخرى تحبونها نصر من الله وفتح قريب وبشر المؤمنين
And another (favour will He bestow,) which ye do love,- help from Allah and a speedy victory. So give the Glad Tidings to the Believers.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا كونوا أنصار الله كما قال عيسى ابن مريم للحواريين من أنصاري إلى الله قال الحواريون نحن أنصار الله فآمنت طائفة من بني إسرائيل وكفرت طائفة فأيدنا الذين آمنوا على عدوهم فأصبحوا ظاهرين
O ye who believe! Be ye helpers of Allah: As said Jesus the son of Mary to the Disciples, "Who will be my helpers to (the work of) Allah?" Said the disciples, "We are Allah's helpers!" then a portion of the Children of Israel believed, and a portion disbelieved: But We gave power to those who believed, against their enemies, and they became the ones that prevailed.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم يسبح لله ما في السماوات وما في الأرض الملك القدوس العزيز الحكيم
Whatever is in the heavens and on earth, doth declare the Praises and Glory of Allah,- the Sovereign, the Holy One, the Exalted in Might, the Wise.

هو الذي بعث في الأميين رسولا منهم يتلو عليهم آياته ويزكيهم ويعلمهم الكتاب والحكمة وإن كانوا من قبل لفي ضلال مبين
It is He Who has sent amongst the Unlettered a messenger from among themselves, to rehearse to them His Signs, to sanctify them, and to instruct them in Scripture and Wisdom,- although they had been, before, in manifest error;-

وآخرين منهم لما يلحقوا بهم وهو العزيز الحكيم
As well as (to confer all these benefits upon) others of them, who have not already joined them: And He is exalted in Might, Wise.

ذلك فضل الله يؤتيه من يشاء والله ذو الفضل العظيم
Such is the Bounty of Allah, which He bestows on whom He will: and Allah is the Lord of the highest bounty.

مثل الذين حملوا التوراة ثم لم يحملوها كمثل الحمار يحمل أسفارا بئس مثل القوم الذين كذبوا بآيات الله والله لا يهدي القوم الظالمين
The similitude of those who were charged with the (obligations of the) Mosaic Law, but who subsequently failed in those (obligations), is that of a donkey which carries huge tomes (but understands them not). Evil is the similitude of people who falsify the Signs of Allah: and Allah guides not people who do wrong.

قل يا أيها الذين هادوا إن زعمتم أنكم أولياء لله من دون الناس فتمنوا الموت إن كنتم صادقين
Say: "O ye that stand on Judaism! If ye think that ye are friends to Allah, to the exclusion of (other) men, then express your desire for Death, if ye are truthful!"

ولا يتمنونه أبدا بما قدمت أيديهم والله عليم بالظالمين
But never will they express their desire (for Death), because of the (deeds) their hands have sent on before them! and Allah knows well those that do wrong!

قل إن الموت الذي تفرون منه فإنه ملاقيكم ثم تردون إلى عالم الغيب والشهادة فينبئكم بما كنتم تعملون
Say: "The Death from which ye flee will truly overtake you: then will ye be sent back to the Knower of things secret and open: and He will tell you (the truth of) the things that ye did!"

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إذا نودي للصلاة من يوم الجمعة فاسعوا إلى ذكر الله وذروا البيع ذلكم خير لكم إن كنتم تعلمون
O ye who believe! When the call is proclaimed to prayer on Friday (the Day of Assembly), hasten earnestly to the Remembrance of Allah, and leave off business (and traffic): That is best for you if ye but knew!

فإذا قضيت الصلاة فانتشروا في الأرض وابتغوا من فضل الله واذكروا الله كثيرا لعلكم تفلحون
And when the Prayer is finished, then may ye disperse through the land, and seek of the Bounty of Allah: and celebrate the Praises of Allah often (and without stint): that ye may prosper.

وإذا رأوا تجارة أو لهوا انفضوا إليها وتركوك قائما قل ما عند الله خير من اللهو ومن التجارة والله خير الرازقين
But when they see some bargain or some amusement, they disperse headlong to it, and leave thee standing. Say: "The (blessing) from the Presence of Allah is better than any amusement or bargain! and Allah is the Best to provide (for all needs)."

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم إذا جاءك المنافقون قالوا نشهد إنك لرسول الله والله يعلم إنك لرسوله والله يشهد إن المنافقين لكاذبون
When the Hypocrites come to thee, they say, "We bear witness that thou art indeed the Messenger of Allah." Yea, Allah knoweth that thou art indeed His Messenger, and Allah beareth witness that the Hypocrites are indeed liars.

اتخذوا أيمانهم جنة فصدوا عن سبيل الله إنهم ساء ما كانوا يعملون
They have made their oaths a screen (for their misdeeds): thus they obstruct (men) from the Path of Allah: truly evil are their deeds.

ذلك بأنهم آمنوا ثم كفروا فطبع على قلوبهم فهم لا يفقهون
That is because they believed, then they rejected Faith: So a seal was set on their hearts: therefore they understand not.

وإذا رأيتهم تعجبك أجسامهم وإن يقولوا تسمع لقولهم كأنهم خشب مسندة يحسبون كل صيحة عليهم هم العدو فاحذرهم قاتلهم الله أنى يؤفكون
When thou lookest at them, their exteriors please thee; and when they speak, thou listenest to their words. They are as (worthless as hollow) pieces of timber propped up, (unable to stand on their own). They think that every cry is against them. They are the enemies; so beware of them. The curse of Allah be on them! How are they deluded (away from the Truth)!

وإذا قيل لهم تعالوا يستغفر لكم رسول الله لووا رءوسهم ورأيتهم يصدون وهم مستكبرون
And when it is said to them, "Come, the Messenger of Allah will pray for your forgiveness", they turn aside their heads, and thou wouldst see them turning away their faces in arrogance.

سواء عليهم أستغفرت لهم أم لم تستغفر لهم لن يغفر الله لهم إن الله لا يهدي القوم الفاسقين
It is equal to them whether thou pray for their forgiveness or not. Allah will not forgive them. Truly Allah guides not rebellious transgressors.

هم الذين يقولون لا تنفقوا على من عند رسول الله حتى ينفضوا ولله خزائن السماوات والأرض ولكن المنافقين لا يفقهون
They are the ones who say, "Spend nothing on those who are with Allah's Messenger, to the end that they may disperse (and quit Medina)." But to Allah belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth; but the Hypocrites understand not.

يقولون لئن رجعنا إلى المدينة ليخرجن الأعز منها الأذل ولله العزة ولرسوله وللمؤمنين ولكن المنافقين لا يعلمون
They say, "If we return to Medina, surely the more honourable (element) will expel therefrom the meaner." But honour belongs to Allah and His Messenger, and to the Believers; but the Hypocrites know not.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تلهكم أموالكم ولا أولادكم عن ذكر الله ومن يفعل ذلك فأولئك هم الخاسرون
O ye who believe! Let not your riches or your children divert you from the remembrance of Allah. If any act thus, the loss is their own.

وأنفقوا من ما رزقناكم من قبل أن يأتي أحدكم الموت فيقول رب لولا أخرتني إلى أجل قريب فأصدق وأكن من الصالحين
and spend something (in charity) out of the substance which We have bestowed on you, before Death should come to any of you and he should say, "O my Lord! why didst Thou not give me respite for a little while? I should then have given (largely) in charity, and I should have been one of the doers of good".

ولن يؤخر الله نفسا إذا جاء أجلها والله خبير بما تعملون
But to no soul will Allah grant respite when the time appointed (for it) has come; and Allah is well acquainted with (all) that ye do.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم يسبح لله ما في السماوات وما في الأرض له الملك وله الحمد وهو على كل شيء قدير
Whatever is in the heavens and on earth, doth declare the Praises and Glory of Allah: to Him belongs dominion, and to Him belongs praise: and He has power over all things.

هو الذي خلقكم فمنكم كافر ومنكم مؤمن والله بما تعملون بصير
It is He Who has created you; and of you are some that are Unbelievers, and some that are Believers: and Allah sees well all that ye do.

خلق السماوات والأرض بالحق وصوركم فأحسن صوركم وإليه المصير
He has created the heavens and the earth in just proportions, and has given you shape, and made your shapes beautiful: and to Him is the final Goal.

يعلم ما في السماوات والأرض ويعلم ما تسرون وما تعلنون والله عليم بذات الصدور
He knows what is in the heavens and on earth; and He knows what ye conceal and what ye reveal: yea, Allah knows well the (secrets) of (all) hearts.

ألم يأتكم نبأ الذين كفروا من قبل فذاقوا وبال أمرهم ولهم عذاب أليم
Has not the story reached you, of those who rejected Faith aforetime? So they tasted the evil result of their conduct; and they had a grievous Penalty.

ذلك بأنه كانت تأتيهم رسلهم بالبينات فقالوا أبشر يهدوننا فكفروا وتولوا واستغنى الله والله غني حميد
That was because there came to them messengers with Clear Signs, but they said: "Shall (mere) human beings direct us?" So they rejected (the Message) and turned away. But Allah can do without (them): and Allah is free of all needs, worthy of all praise.

زعم الذين كفروا أن لن يبعثوا قل بلى وربي لتبعثن ثم لتنبؤن بما عملتم وذلك على الله يسير
The Unbelievers think that they will not be raised up (for Judgment). Say: "Yea, By my Lord, Ye shall surely be raised up: then shall ye be told (the truth) of all that ye did. And that is easy for Allah."

فآمنوا بالله ورسوله والنور الذي أنزلنا والله بما تعملون خبير
Believe, therefore, in Allah and His Messenger, and in the Light which we have sent down. And Allah is well acquainted with all that ye do.

يوم يجمعكم ليوم الجمع ذلك يوم التغابن ومن يؤمن بالله ويعمل صالحا يكفر عنه سيئاته ويدخله جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها أبدا ذلك الفوز العظيم
The Day that He assembles you (all) for a Day of Assembly,- that will be a Day of mutual loss and gain (among you), and those who believe in Allah and work righteousness,- He will remove from them their ills, and He will admit them to Gardens beneath which Rivers flow, to dwell therein for ever: that will be the Supreme Achievement.

والذين كفروا وكذبوا بآياتنا أولئك أصحاب النار خالدين فيها وبئس المصير
But those who reject Faith and treat Our Signs as falsehoods, they will be Companions of the Fire, to dwell therein for aye: and evil is that Goal.

ما أصاب من مصيبة إلا بإذن الله ومن يؤمن بالله يهد قلبه والله بكل شيء عليم
No kind of calamity can occur, except by the leave of Allah: and if any one believes in Allah, (Allah) guides his heart (aright): for Allah knows all things.

وأطيعوا الله وأطيعوا الرسول فإن توليتم فإنما على رسولنا البلاغ المبين
So obey Allah, and obey His Messenger: but if ye turn back, the duty of Our Messenger is but to proclaim (the Message) clearly and openly.

الله لا إله إلا هو وعلى الله فليتوكل المؤمنون
Allah! There is no god but He: and on Allah, therefore, let the Believers put their trust.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا إن من أزواجكم وأولادكم عدوا لكم فاحذروهم وإن تعفوا وتصفحوا وتغفروا فإن الله غفور رحيم
O ye who believe! Truly, among your wives and your children are (some that are) enemies to yourselves: so beware of them! But if ye forgive and overlook, and cover up (their faults), verily Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

إنما أموالكم وأولادكم فتنة والله عنده أجر عظيم
Your riches and your children may be but a trial: but in the Presence of Allah, is the highest, Reward.

فاتقوا الله ما استطعتم واسمعوا وأطيعوا وأنفقوا خيرا لأنفسكم ومن يوق شح نفسه فأولئك هم المفلحون
So fear Allah as much as ye can; listen and obey and spend in charity for the benefit of your own soul and those saved from the covetousness of their own souls,- they are the ones that achieve prosperity.

إن تقرضوا الله قرضا حسنا يضاعفه لكم ويغفر لكم والله شكور حليم
If ye loan to Allah, a beautiful loan, He will double it to your (credit), and He will grant you Forgiveness: for Allah is most Ready to appreciate (service), Most Forbearing,-

عالم الغيب والشهادة العزيز الحكيم
Knower of what is open, Exalted in Might, Full of Wisdom.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم يا أيها النبي إذا طلقتم النساء فطلقوهن لعدتهن وأحصوا العدة واتقوا الله ربكم لا تخرجوهن من بيوتهن ولا يخرجن إلا أن يأتين بفاحشة مبينة وتلك حدود الله ومن يتعد حدود الله فقد ظلم نفسه لا تدري لعل الله يحدث بعد ذلك أمرا
O Prophet! When ye do divorce women, divorce them at their prescribed periods, and count (accurately), their prescribed periods: And fear Allah your Lord: and turn them not out of their houses, nor shall they (themselves) leave, except in case they are guilty of some open lewdness, those are limits set by Allah: and any who transgresses the limits of Allah, does verily wrong his (own) soul: thou knowest not if perchance Allah will bring about thereafter some new situation.

فإذا بلغن أجلهن فأمسكوهن بمعروف أو فارقوهن بمعروف وأشهدوا ذوي عدل منكم وأقيموا الشهادة لله ذلكم يوعظ به من كان يؤمن بالله واليوم الآخر ومن يتق الله يجعل له مخرجا
Thus when they fulfil their term appointed, either take them back on equitable terms or part with them on equitable terms; and take for witness two persons from among you, endued with justice, and establish the evidence (as) before Allah. Such is the admonition given to him who believes in Allah and the Last Day. And for those who fear Allah, He (ever) prepares a way out,

ويرزقه من حيث لا يحتسب ومن يتوكل على الله فهو حسبه إن الله بالغ أمره قد جعل الله لكل شيء قدرا
And He provides for him from (sources) he never could imagine. And if any one puts his trust in Allah, sufficient is (Allah) for him. For Allah will surely accomplish his purpose: verily, for all things has Allah appointed a due proportion.

واللائي يئسن من المحيض من نسائكم إن ارتبتم فعدتهن ثلاثة أشهر واللائي لم يحضن وأولات الأحمال أجلهن أن يضعن حملهن ومن يتق الله يجعل له من أمره يسرا
Such of your women as have passed the age of monthly courses, for them the prescribed period, if ye have any doubts, is three months, and for those who have no courses (it is the same): for those who carry (life within their wombs), their period is until they deliver their burdens: and for those who fear Allah, He will make their path easy.

ذلك أمر الله أنزله إليكم ومن يتق الله يكفر عنه سيئاته ويعظم له أجرا
That is the Command of Allah, which He has sent down to you: and if any one fears Allah, He will remove his ills, from him, and will enlarge his reward.

أسكنوهن من حيث سكنتم من وجدكم ولا تضاروهن لتضيقوا عليهن وإن كن أولات حمل فأنفقوا عليهن حتى يضعن حملهن فإن أرضعن لكم فآتوهن أجورهن وأتمروا بينكم بمعروف وإن تعاسرتم فسترضع له أخرى
Let the women live (in 'iddat) in the same style as ye live, according to your means: Annoy them not, so as to restrict them. And if they carry (life in their wombs), then spend (your substance) on them until they deliver their burden: and if they suckle your (offspring), give them their recompense: and take mutual counsel together, according to what is just and reasonable. And if ye find yourselves in difficulties, let another woman suckle (the child) on the (father's) behalf.

لينفق ذو سعة من سعته ومن قدر عليه رزقه فلينفق مما آتاه الله لا يكلف الله نفسا إلا ما آتاها سيجعل الله بعد عسر يسرا
Let the man of means spend according to his means: and the man whose resources are restricted, let him spend according to what Allah has given him. Allah puts no burden on any person beyond what He has given him. After a difficulty, Allah will soon grant relief.

وكأين من قرية عتت عن أمر ربها ورسله فحاسبناها حسابا شديدا وعذبناها عذابا نكرا
How many populations that insolently opposed the Command of their Lord and of His messengers, did We not then call to account,- to severe account?- and We imposed on them an exemplary Punishment.

فذاقت وبال أمرها وكان عاقبة أمرها خسرا
Then did they taste the evil result of their conduct, and the End of their conduct was Perdition.

أعد الله لهم عذابا شديدا فاتقوا الله يا أولي الألباب الذين آمنوا قد أنزل الله إليكم ذكرا
Allah has prepared for them a severe Punishment (in the Hereafter). Therefore fear Allah, O ye men of understanding - who have believed!- for Allah hath indeed sent down to you a Message,-

رسولا يتلو عليكم آيات الله مبينات ليخرج الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات من الظلمات إلى النور ومن يؤمن بالله ويعمل صالحا يدخله جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها أبدا قد أحسن الله له رزقا
An Messenger, who rehearses to you the Signs of Allah containing clear explanations, that he may lead forth those who believe and do righteous deeds from the depths of Darkness into Light. And those who believe in Allah and work righteousness, He will admit to Gardens beneath which Rivers flow, to dwell therein for ever: Allah has indeed granted for them a most excellent Provision.

الله الذي خلق سبع سماوات ومن الأرض مثلهن يتنزل الأمر بينهن لتعلموا أن الله على كل شيء قدير وأن الله قد أحاط بكل شيء علما
Allah is He Who created seven Firmaments and of the earth a similar number. Through the midst of them (all) descends His Command: that ye may know that Allah has power over all things, and that Allah comprehends, all things in (His) Knowledge.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم يا أيها النبي لم تحرم ما أحل الله لك تبتغي مرضات أزواجك والله غفور رحيم
O Prophet! Why holdest thou to be forbidden that which Allah has made lawful to thee? Thou seekest to please thy consorts. But Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

قد فرض الله لكم تحلة أيمانكم والله مولاكم وهو العليم الحكيم
Allah has already ordained for you, (O men), the dissolution of your oaths (in some cases): and Allah is your Protector, and He is Full of Knowledge and Wisdom.

وإذ أسر النبي إلى بعض أزواجه حديثا فلما نبأت به وأظهره الله عليه عرف بعضه وأعرض عن بعض فلما نبأها به قالت من أنبأك هذا قال نبأني العليم الخبير
When the Prophet disclosed a matter in confidence to one of his consorts, and she then divulged it (to another), and Allah made it known to him, he confirmed part thereof and repudiated a part. Then when he told her thereof, she said, "Who told thee this? "He said, "He told me Who knows and is well-acquainted (with all things)."

إن تتوبا إلى الله فقد صغت قلوبكما وإن تظاهرا عليه فإن الله هو مولاه وجبريل وصالح المؤمنين والملائكة بعد ذلك ظهير
If ye two turn in repentance to Him, your hearts are indeed so inclined; But if ye back up each other against him, truly Allah is his Protector, and Gabriel, and (every) righteous one among those who believe,- and furthermore, the angels - will back (him) up.

عسى ربه إن طلقكن أن يبدله أزواجا خيرا منكن مسلمات مؤمنات قانتات تائبات عابدات سائحات ثيبات وأبكارا
It may be, if he divorced you (all), that Allah will give him in exchange consorts better than you,- who submit (their wills), who believe, who are devout, who turn to Allah in repentance, who worship (in humility), who travel (for Faith) and fast,- previously married or virgins.

يا أيها الذين آمنوا قوا أنفسكم وأهليكم نارا وقودها الناس والحجارة عليها ملائكة غلاظ شداد لا يعصون الله ما أمرهم ويفعلون ما يؤمرون
O ye who believe! save yourselves and your families from a Fire whose fuel is Men and Stones, over which are (appointed) angels stern (and) severe, who flinch not (from executing) the Commands they receive from Allah, but do (precisely) what they are commanded.

يا أيها الذين كفروا لا تعتذروا اليوم إنما تجزون ما كنتم تعملون
(They will say), "O ye Unbelievers! Make no excuses this Day! Ye are being but requited for all that ye did!"

يا أيها الذين آمنوا توبوا إلى الله توبة نصوحا عسى ربكم أن يكفر عنكم سيئاتكم ويدخلكم جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار يوم لا يخزي الله النبي والذين آمنوا معه نورهم يسعى بين أيديهم وبأيمانهم يقولون ربنا أتمم لنا نورنا واغفر لنا إنك على كل شيء قدير
O ye who believe! Turn to Allah with sincere repentance: In the hope that your Lord will remove from you your ills and admit you to Gardens beneath which Rivers flow,- the Day that Allah will not permit to be humiliated the Prophet and those who believe with him. Their Light will run forward before them and by their right hands, while they say, "Our Lord! Perfect our Light for us, and grant us Forgiveness: for Thou hast power over all things."

يا أيها النبي جاهد الكفار والمنافقين واغلظ عليهم ومأواهم جهنم وبئس المصير
O Prophet! Strive hard against the Unbelievers and the Hypocrites, and be firm against them. Their abode is Hell,- an evil refuge (indeed).

ضرب الله مثلا للذين كفروا امرأت نوح وامرأت لوط كانتا تحت عبدين من عبادنا صالحين فخانتاهما فلم يغنيا عنهما من الله شيئا وقيل ادخلا النار مع الداخلين
Allah sets forth, for an example to the Unbelievers, the wife of Noah and the wife of Lut: they were (respectively) under two of our righteous servants, but they were false to their (husbands), and they profited nothing before Allah on their account, but were told: "Enter ye the Fire along with (others) that enter!"

وضرب الله مثلا للذين آمنوا امرأت فرعون إذ قالت رب ابن لي عندك بيتا في الجنة ونجني من فرعون وعمله ونجني من القوم الظالمين
And Allah sets forth, as an example to those who believe the wife of Pharaoh: Behold she said: "O my Lord! Build for me, in nearness to Thee, a mansion in the Garden, and save me from Pharaoh and his doings, and save me from those that do wrong";

ومريم ابنت عمران التي أحصنت فرجها فنفخنا فيه من روحنا وصدقت بكلمات ربها وكتبه وكانت من القانتين
And Mary the daughter of 'Imran, who guarded her chastity; and We breathed into (her body) of Our spirit; and she testified to the truth of the words of her Lord and of His Revelations, and was one of the devout (servants).

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم تبارك الذي بيده الملك وهو على كل شيء قدير
Blessed be He in Whose hands is Dominion; and He over all things hath Power;-

الذي خلق الموت والحياة ليبلوكم أيكم أحسن عملا وهو العزيز الغفور
He Who created Death and Life, that He may try which of you is best in deed: and He is the Exalted in Might, Oft-Forgiving;-

الذي خلق سبع سماوات طباقا ما ترى في خلق الرحمن من تفاوت فارجع البصر هل ترى من فطور
He Who created the seven heavens one above another: No want of proportion wilt thou see in the Creation of (Allah) Most Gracious. So turn thy vision again: seest thou any flaw?

ثم ارجع البصر كرتين ينقلب إليك البصر خاسئا وهو حسير
Again turn thy vision a second time: (thy) vision will come back to thee dull and discomfited, in a state worn out.

ولقد زينا السماء الدنيا بمصابيح وجعلناها رجوما للشياطين وأعتدنا لهم عذاب السعير
And we have, (from of old), adorned the lowest heaven with Lamps, and We have made such (Lamps) (as) missiles to drive away the Evil Ones, and have prepared for them the Penalty of the Blazing Fire.

وللذين كفروا بربهم عذاب جهنم وبئس المصير
For those who reject their Lord (and Cherisher) is the Penalty of Hell: and evil is (such), Destination.

إذا ألقوا فيها سمعوا لها شهيقا وهي تفور
When they are cast therein, they will hear the (terrible) drawing in of its breath even as it blazes forth,

تكاد تميز من الغيظ كلما ألقي فيها فوج سألهم خزنتها ألم يأتكم نذير
Almost bursting with fury: Every time a Group is cast therein, its Keepers will ask, "Did no Warner come to you?"

قالوا بلى قد جاءنا نذير فكذبنا وقلنا ما نزل الله من شيء إن أنتم إلا في ضلال كبير
They will say: "Yes indeed; a Warner did come to us, but we rejected him and said, 'Allah never sent down any (Message): ye are nothing but an egregious delusion!'"

وقالوا لو كنا نسمع أو نعقل ما كنا في أصحاب السعير
They will further say: "Had we but listened or used our intelligence, we should not (now) be among the Companions of the Blazing Fire!"

فاعترفوا بذنبهم فسحقا لأصحاب السعير
They will then confess their sins: but far will be (Forgiveness) from the Companions of the Blazing Fire!

إن الذين يخشون ربهم بالغيب لهم مغفرة وأجر كبير
As for those who fear their Lord unseen, for them is Forgiveness and a great Reward.

وأسروا قولكم أو اجهروا به إنه عليم بذات الصدور
And whether ye hide your word or publish it, He certainly has (full) knowledge, of the secrets of (all) hearts.

ألا يعلم من خلق وهو اللطيف الخبير
Should He not know,- He that created? and He is the One that understands the finest mysteries (and) is well-acquainted (with them).

هو الذي جعل لكم الأرض ذلولا فامشوا في مناكبها وكلوا من رزقه وإليه النشور
It is He Who has made the earth manageable for you, so traverse ye through its tracts and enjoy of the Sustenance which He furnishes: but unto Him is the Resurrection.

أأمنتم من في السماء أن يخسف بكم الأرض فإذا هي تمور
Do ye feel secure that He Who is in heaven will not cause you to be swallowed up by the earth when it shakes (as in an earthquake)?

أم أمنتم من في السماء أن يرسل عليكم حاصبا فستعلمون كيف نذير
Or do ye feel secure that He Who is in Heaven will not send against you a violent tornado (with showers of stones), so that ye shall know how (terrible) was My warning?

ولقد كذب الذين من قبلهم فكيف كان نكير
But indeed men before them rejected (My warning): then how (terrible) was My rejection (of them)?

أولم يروا إلى الطير فوقهم صافات ويقبضن ما يمسكهن إلا الرحمن إنه بكل شيء بصير
Do they not observe the birds above them, spreading their wings and folding them in? None can uphold them except (Allah) Most Gracious: Truly (Allah) Most Gracious: Truly it is He that watches over all things.

أمن هذا الذي هو جند لكم ينصركم من دون الرحمن إن الكافرون إلا في غرور
Nay, who is there that can help you, (even as) an army, besides (Allah) Most Merciful? In nothing but delusion are the Unbelievers.

أمن هذا الذي يرزقكم إن أمسك رزقه بل لجوا في عتو ونفور
Or who is there that can provide you with Sustenance if He were to withhold His provision? Nay, they obstinately persist in insolent impiety and flight (from the Truth).

أفمن يمشي مكبا على وجهه أهدى أمن يمشي سويا على صراط مستقيم
Is then one who walks headlong, with his face grovelling, better guided,- or one who walks evenly on a Straight Way?

قل هو الذي أنشأكم وجعل لكم السمع والأبصار والأفئدة قليلا ما تشكرون
Say: "It is He Who has created you (and made you grow), and made for you the faculties of hearing, seeing, feeling and understanding: little thanks it is ye give.

قل هو الذي ذرأكم في الأرض وإليه تحشرون
Say: "It is He Who has multiplied you through the earth, and to Him shall ye be gathered together."

ويقولون متى هذا الوعد إن كنتم صادقين
They ask: When will this promise be (fulfilled)? - If ye are telling the truth.

قل إنما العلم عند الله وإنما أنا نذير مبين
Say: "As to the knowledge of the time, it is with Allah alone: I am (sent) only to warn plainly in public."

فلما رأوه زلفة سيئت وجوه الذين كفروا وقيل هذا الذي كنتم به تدعون
At length, when they see it close at hand, grieved will be the faces of the Unbelievers, and it will be said (to them): "This is (the promise fulfilled), which ye were calling for!"

قل أرأيتم إن أهلكني الله ومن معي أو رحمنا فمن يجير الكافرين من عذاب أليم
Say: "See ye?- If Allah were to destroy me, and those with me, or if He bestows His Mercy on us,- yet who can deliver the Unbelievers from a grievous Penalty?"

قل هو الرحمن آمنا به وعليه توكلنا فستعلمون من هو في ضلال مبين
Say: "He is (Allah) Most Gracious: We have believed in Him, and on Him have we put our trust: So, soon will ye know which (of us) it is that is in manifest error."

قل أرأيتم إن أصبح ماؤكم غورا فمن يأتيكم بماء معين
Say: "See ye?- If your stream be some morning lost (in the underground earth), who then can supply you with clear-flowing water?"

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم ن والقلم وما يسطرون
Nun. By the Pen and the (Record) which (men) write,-

ما أنت بنعمة ربك بمجنون
Thou art not, by the Grace of thy Lord, mad or possessed.

وإن لك لأجرا غير ممنون
Nay, verily for thee is a Reward unfailing:

وإنك لعلى خلق عظيم
And thou (standest) on an exalted standard of character.

فستبصر ويبصرون
Soon wilt thou see, and they will see,

بأييكم المفتون
Which of you is afflicted with madness.

إن ربك هو أعلم بمن ضل عن سبيله وهو أعلم بالمهتدين
Verily it is thy Lord that knoweth best, which (among men) hath strayed from His Path: and He knoweth best those who receive (true) Guidance.

فلا تطع المكذبين
So hearken not to those who deny (the Truth).

ودوا لو تدهن فيدهنون
Their desire is that thou shouldst be pliant: so would they be pliant.

ولا تطع كل حلاف مهين
Heed not the type of despicable men,- ready with oaths,

هماز مشاء بنميم
A slanderer, going about with calumnies,

مناع للخير معتد أثيم
(Habitually) hindering (all) good, transgressing beyond bounds, deep in sin,

عتل بعد ذلك زنيم
Violent (and cruel),- with all that, base-born,-

أن كان ذا مال وبنين
Because he possesses wealth and (numerous) sons.

إذا تتلى عليه آياتنا قال أساطير الأولين
When to him are rehearsed Our Signs, "Tales of the ancients", he cries!

سنسمه على الخرطوم
Soon shall We brand (the beast) on the snout!

إنا بلوناهم كما بلونا أصحاب الجنة إذ أقسموا ليصرمنها مصبحين
Verily We have tried them as We tried the People of the Garden, when they resolved to gather the fruits of the (garden) in the morning.

ولا يستثنون
But made no reservation, ("If it be Allah's Will").

فطاف عليها طائف من ربك وهم نائمون
Then there came on the (garden) a visitation from thy Lord, (which swept away) all around, while they were asleep.

فأصبحت كالصريم
So the (garden) became, by the morning, like a dark and desolate spot, (whose fruit had been gathered).

فتنادوا مصبحين
As the morning broke, they called out, one to another,-

أن اغدوا على حرثكم إن كنتم صارمين
"Go ye to your tilth (betimes) in the morning, if ye would gather the fruits."

فانطلقوا وهم يتخافتون
So they departed, conversing in secret low tones, (saying)-

أن لا يدخلنها اليوم عليكم مسكين
"Let not a single indigent person break in upon you into the (garden) this day."

وغدوا على حرد قادرين
And they opened the morning, strong in an (unjust) resolve.

فلما رأوها قالوا إنا لضالون
But when they saw the (garden), they said: "We have surely lost our way:

بل نحن محرومون
"Indeed we are shut out (of the fruits of our labour)!"

قال أوسطهم ألم أقل لكم لولا تسبحون
Said one of them, more just (than the rest): "Did I not say to you, 'Why not glorify (Allah)?'"

قالوا سبحان ربنا إنا كنا ظالمين
They said: "Glory to our Lord! Verily we have been doing wrong!"

فأقبل بعضهم على بعض يتلاومون
Then they turned, one against another, in reproach.

قالوا يا ويلنا إنا كنا طاغين
They said: "Alas for us! We have indeed transgressed!

عسى ربنا أن يبدلنا خيرا منها إنا إلى ربنا راغبون
"It may be that our Lord will give us in exchange a better (garden) than this: for we do turn to Him (in repentance)!"

كذلك العذاب ولعذاب الآخرة أكبر لو كانوا يعلمون
Such is the Punishment (in this life); but greater is the Punishment in the Hereafter,- if only they knew!

إن للمتقين عند ربهم جنات النعيم
Verily, for the Righteous, are Gardens of Delight, in the Presence of their Lord.

أفنجعل المسلمين كالمجرمين
Shall We then treat the People of Faith like the People of Sin?

ما لكم كيف تحكمون
What is the matter with you? How judge ye?

أم لكم كتاب فيه تدرسون
Or have ye a book through which ye learn-

إن لكم فيه لما تخيرون
That ye shall have, through it whatever ye choose?

أم لكم أيمان علينا بالغة إلى يوم القيامة إن لكم لما تحكمون
Or have ye Covenants with Us to oath, reaching to the Day of Judgment, (providing) that ye shall have whatever ye shall demand?

سلهم أيهم بذلك زعيم
Ask thou of them, which of them will stand surety for that!

أم لهم شركاء فليأتوا بشركائهم إن كانوا صادقين
Or have they some "Partners" (in Allahhead)? Then let them produce their "partners", if they are truthful!

يوم يكشف عن ساق ويدعون إلى السجود فلا يستطيعون
The Day that the shin shall be laid bare, and they shall be summoned to bow in adoration, but they shall not be able,-

خاشعة أبصارهم ترهقهم ذلة وقد كانوا يدعون إلى السجود وهم سالمون
Their eyes will be cast down,- ignominy will cover them; seeing that they had been summoned aforetime to bow in adoration, while they were whole, (and had refused).

فذرني ومن يكذب بهذا الحديث سنستدرجهم من حيث لا يعلمون
Then leave Me alone with such as reject this Message: by degrees shall We punish them from directions they perceive not.

وأملي لهم إن كيدي متين
A (long) respite will I grant them: truly powerful is My Plan.

أم تسألهم أجرا فهم من مغرم مثقلون
Or is it that thou dost ask them for a reward, so that they are burdened with a load of debt?-

أم عندهم الغيب فهم يكتبون
Or that the Unseen is in their hands, so that they can write it down?

فاصبر لحكم ربك ولا تكن كصاحب الحوت إذ نادى وهو مكظوم
So wait with patience for the Command of thy Lord, and be not like the Companion of the Fish,- when he cried out in agony.

لولا أن تداركه نعمة من ربه لنبذ بالعراء وهو مذموم
Had not Grace from his Lord reached him, he would indeed have been cast off on the naked shore, in disgrace.

فاجتباه ربه فجعله من الصالحين
Thus did his Lord choose him and make him of the Company of the Righteous.

وإن يكاد الذين كفروا ليزلقونك بأبصارهم لما سمعوا الذكر ويقولون إنه لمجنون
And the Unbelievers would almost trip thee up with their eyes when they hear the Message; and they say: "Surely he is possessed!"

وما هو إلا ذكر للعالمين
But it is nothing less than a Message to all the worlds.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم الحاقة
The Sure Reality!

ما الحاقة
What is the Sure Reality?

وما أدراك ما الحاقة
And what will make thee realise what the Sure Reality is?

كذبت ثمود وعاد بالقارعة
The Thamud and the 'Ad People (branded) as false the Stunning Calamity!

فأما ثمود فأهلكوا بالطاغية
But the Thamud,- they were destroyed by a terrible Storm of thunder and lightning!

وأما عاد فأهلكوا بريح صرصر عاتية
And the 'Ad, they were destroyed by a furious Wind, exceedingly violent;

سخرها عليهم سبع ليال وثمانية أيام حسوما فترى القوم فيها صرعى كأنهم أعجاز نخل خاوية
He made it rage against them seven nights and eight days in succession: so that thou couldst see the (whole) people lying prostrate in its (path), as they had been roots of hollow palm-trees tumbled down!

فهل ترى لهم من باقية
Then seest thou any of them left surviving?

وجاء فرعون ومن قبله والمؤتفكات بالخاطئة
And Pharaoh, and those before him, and the Cities Overthrown, committed habitual Sin.

فعصوا رسول ربهم فأخذهم أخذة رابية
And disobeyed (each) the messenger of their Lord; so He punished them with an abundant Penalty.

إنا لما طغى الماء حملناكم في الجارية
We, when the water (of Noah's Flood) overflowed beyond its limits, carried you (mankind), in the floating (Ark),

لنجعلها لكم تذكرة وتعيها أذن واعية
That We might make it a Message unto you, and that ears (that should hear the tale and) retain its memory should bear its (lessons) in remembrance.

فإذا نفخ في الصور نفخة واحدة
Then, when one blast is sounded on the Trumpet,

وحملت الأرض والجبال فدكتا دكة واحدة
And the earth is moved, and its mountains, and they are crushed to powder at one stroke,-

فيومئذ وقعت الواقعة
On that Day shall the (Great) Event come to pass.

وانشقت السماء فهي يومئذ واهية
And the sky will be rent asunder, for it will that Day be flimsy,

والملك على أرجائها ويحمل عرش ربك فوقهم يومئذ ثمانية
And the angels will be on its sides, and eight will, that Day, bear the Throne of thy Lord above them.

يومئذ تعرضون لا تخفى منكم خافية
That Day shall ye be brought to Judgment: not an act of yours that ye hide will be hidden.

فأما من أوتي كتابه بيمينه فيقول هاؤم اقرءوا كتابيه
Then he that will be given his Record in his right hand will say: "Ah here! Read ye my Record!

إني ظننت أني ملاق حسابيه
"I did really understand that my Account would (One Day) reach me!"

فهو في عيشة راضية
And he will be in a life of Bliss,

في جنة عالية
In a Garden on high,

قطوفها دانية
The Fruits whereof (will hang in bunches) low and near.

كلوا واشربوا هنيئا بما أسلفتم في الأيام الخالية
"Eat ye and drink ye, with full satisfaction; because of the (good) that ye sent before you, in the days that are gone!"

وأما من أوتي كتابه بشماله فيقول يا ليتني لم أوت كتابيه
And he that will be given his Record in his left hand, will say: "Ah! Would that my Record had not been given to me!

ولم أدر ما حسابيه
"And that I had never realised how my account (stood)!

يا ليتها كانت القاضية
"Ah! Would that (Death) had made an end of me!

ما أغنى عني ماليه
"Of no profit to me has been my wealth!

هلك عني سلطانيه
"My power has perished from me!"...

خذوه فغلوه
(The stern command will say): "Seize ye him, and bind ye him,

ثم الجحيم صلوه
"And burn ye him in the Blazing Fire.

ثم في سلسلة ذرعها سبعون ذراعا فاسلكوه
"Further, make him march in a chain, whereof the length is seventy cubits!

إنه كان لا يؤمن بالله العظيم
"This was he that would not believe in Allah Most High.

ولا يحض على طعام المسكين
"And would not encourage the feeding of the indigent!

فليس له اليوم هاهنا حميم
"So no friend hath he here this Day.

ولا طعام إلا من غسلين
"Nor hath he any food except the corruption from the washing of wounds,

لا يأكله إلا الخاطئون
"Which none do eat but those in sin."

فلا أقسم بما تبصرون
So I do call to witness what ye see,

وما لا تبصرون
And what ye see not,

إنه لقول رسول كريم
That this is verily the word of an honoured messenger;

وما هو بقول شاعر قليلا ما تؤمنون
It is not the word of a poet: little it is ye believe!

ولا بقول كاهن قليلا ما تذكرون
Nor is it the word of a soothsayer: little admonition it is ye receive.

تنزيل من رب العالمين
(This is) a Message sent down from the Lord of the Worlds.

ولو تقول علينا بعض الأقاويل
And if the messenger were to invent any sayings in Our name,

لأخذنا منه باليمين
We should certainly seize him by his right hand,

ثم لقطعنا منه الوتين
And We should certainly then cut off the artery of his heart:

فما منكم من أحد عنه حاجزين
Nor could any of you withhold him (from Our wrath).

وإنه لتذكرة للمتقين
But verily this is a Message for the Allah-fearing.

وإنا لنعلم أن منكم مكذبين
And We certainly know that there are amongst you those that reject (it).

وإنه لحسرة على الكافرين
But truly (Revelation) is a cause of sorrow for the Unbelievers.

وإنه لحق اليقين
But verily it is Truth of assured certainty.

فسبح باسم ربك العظيم
So glorify the name of thy Lord Most High.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم سأل سائل بعذاب واقع
A questioner asked about a Penalty to befall-

للكافرين ليس له دافع
The Unbelievers, the which there is none to ward off,-

من الله ذي المعارج
(A Penalty) from Allah, Lord of the Ways of Ascent.

تعرج الملائكة والروح إليه في يوم كان مقداره خمسين ألف سنة
The angels and the spirit ascend unto him in a Day the measure whereof is (as) fifty thousand years:

فاصبر صبرا جميلا
Therefore do thou hold Patience,- a Patience of beautiful (contentment).

إنهم يرونه بعيدا
They see the (Day) indeed as a far-off (event):

ونراه قريبا
But We see it (quite) near.

يوم تكون السماء كالمهل
The Day that the sky will be like molten brass,

وتكون الجبال كالعهن
And the mountains will be like wool,

ولا يسأل حميم حميما
And no friend will ask after a friend,

يبصرونهم يود المجرم لو يفتدي من عذاب يومئذ ببنيه
Though they will be put in sight of each other,- the sinner's desire will be: Would that he could redeem himself from the Penalty of that Day by (sacrificing) his children,

وصاحبته وأخيه
His wife and his brother,

وفصيلته التي تؤويه
His kindred who sheltered him,

ومن في الأرض جميعا ثم ينجيه
And all, all that is on earth,- so it could deliver him:

كلا إنها لظى
By no means! for it would be the Fire of Hell!-

نزاعة للشوى
Plucking out (his being) right to the skull!-

تدعو من أدبر وتولى
Inviting (all) such as turn their backs and turn away their faces (from the Right).

وجمع فأوعى
And collect (wealth) and hide it (from use)!

إن الإنسان خلق هلوعا
Truly man was created very impatient;-

إذا مسه الشر جزوعا
Fretful when evil touches him;

وإذا مسه الخير منوعا
And niggardly when good reaches him;-

إلا المصلين
Not so those devoted to Prayer;-

الذين هم على صلاتهم دائمون
Those who remain steadfast to their prayer;

والذين في أموالهم حق معلوم
And those in whose wealth is a recognised right.

للسائل والمحروم
For the (needy) who asks and him who is prevented (for some reason from asking);

والذين يصدقون بيوم الدين
And those who hold to the truth of the Day of Judgment;

والذين هم من عذاب ربهم مشفقون
And those who fear the displeasure of their Lord,-

إن عذاب ربهم غير مأمون
For their Lord's displeasure is the opposite of Peace and Tranquillity;-

والذين هم لفروجهم حافظون
And those who guard their chastity,

إلا على أزواجهم أو ما ملكت أيمانهم فإنهم غير ملومين
Except with their wives and the (captives) whom their right hands possess,- for (then) they are not to be blamed,

فمن ابتغى وراء ذلك فأولئك هم العادون
But those who trespass beyond this are transgressors;-

والذين هم لأماناتهم وعهدهم راعون
And those who respect their trusts and covenants;

والذين هم بشهاداتهم قائمون
And those who stand firm in their testimonies;

والذين هم على صلاتهم يحافظون
And those who guard (the sacredness) of their worship;-

أولئك في جنات مكرمون
Such will be the honoured ones in the Gardens (of Bliss).

فمال الذين كفروا قبلك مهطعين
Now what is the matter with the Unbelievers that they rush madly before thee-

عن اليمين وعن الشمال عزين
From the right and from the left, in crowds?

أيطمع كل امرئ منهم أن يدخل جنة نعيم
Does every man of them long to enter the Garden of Bliss?

كلا إنا خلقناهم مما يعلمون
By no means! For We have created them out of the (base matter) they know!

فلا أقسم برب المشارق والمغارب إنا لقادرون
Now I do call to witness the Lord of all points in the East and the West that We can certainly-

على أن نبدل خيرا منهم وما نحن بمسبوقين
Substitute for them better (men) than they; And We are not to be defeated (in Our Plan).

فذرهم يخوضوا ويلعبوا حتى يلاقوا يومهم الذي يوعدون
So leave them to plunge in vain talk and play about, until they encounter that Day of theirs which they have been promised!-

يوم يخرجون من الأجداث سراعا كأنهم إلى نصب يوفضون
The Day whereon they will issue from their sepulchres in sudden haste as if they were rushing to a goal-post (fixed for them),-

خاشعة أبصارهم ترهقهم ذلة ذلك اليوم الذي كانوا يوعدون
Their eyes lowered in dejection,- ignominy covering them (all over)! such is the Day the which they are promised!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم إنا أرسلنا نوحا إلى قومه أن أنذر قومك من قبل أن يأتيهم عذاب أليم
We sent Noah to his People (with the Command): "Do thou warn thy People before there comes to them a grievous Penalty."

قال يا قوم إني لكم نذير مبين
He said: "O my People! I am to you a Warner, clear and open:

أن اعبدوا الله واتقوه وأطيعون
"That ye should worship Allah, fear Him and obey me:

يغفر لكم من ذنوبكم ويؤخركم إلى أجل مسمى إن أجل الله إذا جاء لا يؤخر لو كنتم تعلمون
"So He may forgive you your sins and give you respite for a stated Term: for when the Term given by Allah is accomplished, it cannot be put forward: if ye only knew."

قال رب إني دعوت قومي ليلا ونهارا
He said: "O my Lord! I have called to my People night and day:

فلم يزدهم دعائي إلا فرارا
"But my call only increases (their) flight (from the Right).

وإني كلما دعوتهم لتغفر لهم جعلوا أصابعهم في آذانهم واستغشوا ثيابهم وأصروا واستكبروا استكبارا
"And every time I have called to them, that Thou mightest forgive them, they have (only) thrust their fingers into their ears, covered themselves up with their garments, grown obstinate, and given themselves up to arrogance.

ثم إني دعوتهم جهارا
"So I have called to them aloud;

ثم إني أعلنت لهم وأسررت لهم إسرارا
"Further I have spoken to them in public and secretly in private,

فقلت استغفروا ربكم إنه كان غفارا
"Saying, 'Ask forgiveness from your Lord; for He is Oft-Forgiving;

يرسل السماء عليكم مدرارا
"'He will send rain to you in abundance;

ويمددكم بأموال وبنين ويجعل لكم جنات ويجعل لكم أنهارا
"'Give you increase in wealth and sons; and bestow on you gardens and bestow on you rivers (of flowing water).

ما لكم لا ترجون لله وقارا
"'What is the matter with you, that ye place not your hope for kindness and long-suffering in Allah,-

وقد خلقكم أطوارا
"'Seeing that it is He that has created you in diverse stages?

ألم تروا كيف خلق الله سبع سماوات طباقا
"'See ye not how Allah has created the seven heavens one above another,

وجعل القمر فيهن نورا وجعل الشمس سراجا
"'And made the moon a light in their midst, and made the sun as a (Glorious) Lamp?

والله أنبتكم من الأرض نباتا
"'And Allah has produced you from the earth growing (gradually),

ثم يعيدكم فيها ويخرجكم إخراجا
"'And in the End He will return you into the (earth), and raise you forth (again at the Resurrection)?

والله جعل لكم الأرض بساطا
"'And Allah has made the earth for you as a carpet (spread out),

لتسلكوا منها سبلا فجاجا
"'That ye may go about therein, in spacious roads.'"

قال نوح رب إنهم عصوني واتبعوا من لم يزده ماله وولده إلا خسارا
Noah said: "O my Lord! They have disobeyed me, but they follow (men) whose wealth and children give them no increase but only Loss.

ومكروا مكرا كبارا
"And they have devised a tremendous Plot.

وقالوا لا تذرن آلهتكم ولا تذرن ودا ولا سواعا ولا يغوث ويعوق ونسرا
"And they have said (to each other), 'Abandon not your gods: Abandon neither Wadd nor Suwa', neither Yaguth nor Ya'uq, nor Nasr';-

وقد أضلوا كثيرا ولا تزد الظالمين إلا ضلالا
"They have already misled many; and grant Thou no increase to the wrong-doers but in straying (from their mark)."

مما خطيئاتهم أغرقوا فأدخلوا نارا فلم يجدوا لهم من دون الله أنصارا
Because of their sins they were drowned (in the flood), and were made to enter the Fire (of Punishment): and they found- in lieu of Allah- none to help them.

وقال نوح رب لا تذر على الأرض من الكافرين ديارا
And Noah, said: "O my Lord! Leave not of the Unbelievers, a single one on earth!

إنك إن تذرهم يضلوا عبادك ولا يلدوا إلا فاجرا كفارا
"For, if Thou dost leave (any of) them, they will but mislead Thy devotees, and they will breed none but wicked ungrateful ones.

رب اغفر لي ولوالدي ولمن دخل بيتي مؤمنا وللمؤمنين والمؤمنات ولا تزد الظالمين إلا تبارا
"O my Lord! Forgive me, my parents, all who enter my house in Faith, and (all) believing men and believing women: and to the wrong-doers grant Thou no increase but in perdition!"

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم قل أوحي إلي أنه استمع نفر من الجن فقالوا إنا سمعنا قرآنا عجبا
Say: It has been revealed to me that a company of Jinns listened (to the Qur'an). They said, 'We have really heard a wonderful Recital!

يهدي إلى الرشد فآمنا به ولن نشرك بربنا أحدا
'It gives guidance to the Right, and we have believed therein: we shall not join (in worship) any (gods) with our Lord.

وأنه تعالى جد ربنا ما اتخذ صاحبة ولا ولدا
'And Exalted is the Majesty of our Lord: He has taken neither a wife nor a son.

وأنه كان يقول سفيهنا على الله شططا
'There were some foolish ones among us, who used to utter extravagant lies against Allah;

وأنا ظننا أن لن تقول الإنس والجن على الله كذبا
'But we do think that no man or spirit should say aught that untrue against Allah.

وأنه كان رجال من الإنس يعوذون برجال من الجن فزادوهم رهقا
'True, there were persons among mankind who took shelter with persons among the Jinns, but they increased them in folly.

وأنهم ظنوا كما ظننتم أن لن يبعث الله أحدا
'And they (came to) think as ye thought, that Allah would not raise up any one (to Judgment).

وأنا لمسنا السماء فوجدناها ملئت حرسا شديدا وشهبا
'And we pried into the secrets of heaven; but we found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires.

وأنا كنا نقعد منها مقاعد للسمع فمن يستمع الآن يجد له شهابا رصدا
'We used, indeed, to sit there in (hidden) stations, to (steal) a hearing; but any who listen now will find a flaming fire watching him in ambush.

وأنا لا ندري أشر أريد بمن في الأرض أم أراد بهم ربهم رشدا
'And we understand not whether ill is intended to those on earth, or whether their Lord (really) intends to guide them to right conduct.

وأنا منا الصالحون ومنا دون ذلك كنا طرائق قددا
'There are among us some that are righteous, and some the contrary: we follow divergent paths.

وأنا ظننا أن لن نعجز الله في الأرض ولن نعجزه هربا
'But we think that we can by no means frustrate Allah throughout the earth, nor can we frustrate Him by flight.

وأنا لما سمعنا الهدى آمنا به فمن يؤمن بربه فلا يخاف بخسا ولا رهقا
'And as for us, since we have listened to the Guidance, we have accepted it: and any who believes in his Lord has no fear, either of a short (account) or of any injustice.

وأنا منا المسلمون ومنا القاسطون فمن أسلم فأولئك تحروا رشدا
'Amongst us are some that submit their wills (to Allah), and some that swerve from justice. Now those who submit their wills - they have sought out (the path) of right conduct:

وأما القاسطون فكانوا لجهنم حطبا
'But those who swerve,- they are (but) fuel for Hell-fire'-

وأن لو استقاموا على الطريقة لأسقيناهم ماء غدقا
(And Allah's Message is): "If they (the Pagans) had (only) remained on the (right) Way, We should certainly have bestowed on them Rain in abundance.

لنفتنهم فيه ومن يعرض عن ذكر ربه يسلكه عذابا صعدا
"That We might try them by that (means). But if any turns away from the remembrance of his Lord, He will cause him to undergo a severe Penalty.

وأن المساجد لله فلا تدعوا مع الله أحدا
"And the places of worship are for Allah (alone): So invoke not any one along with Allah;

وأنه لما قام عبد الله يدعوه كادوا يكونون عليه لبدا
"Yet when the Devotee of Allah stands forth to invoke Him, they just make round him a dense crowd."

قل إنما أدعو ربي ولا أشرك به أحدا
Say: "I do no more than invoke my Lord, and I join not with Him any (false god)."

قل إني لا أملك لكم ضرا ولا رشدا
Say: "It is not in my power to cause you harm, or to bring you to right conduct."

قل إني لن يجيرني من الله أحد ولن أجد من دونه ملتحدا
Say: "No one can deliver me from Allah (If I were to disobey Him), nor should I find refuge except in Him,

إلا بلاغا من الله ورسالاته ومن يعص الله ورسوله فإن له نار جهنم خالدين فيها أبدا
"Unless I proclaim what I receive from Allah and His Messages: for any that disobey Allah and His Messenger,- for them is Hell: they shall dwell therein for ever."

حتى إذا رأوا ما يوعدون فسيعلمون من أضعف ناصرا وأقل عددا
At length, when they see (with their own eyes) that which they are promised,- then will they know who it is that is weakest in (his) helper and least important in point of numbers.

قل إن أدري أقريب ما توعدون أم يجعل له ربي أمدا
Say: "I know not whether the (Punishment) which ye are promised is near, or whether my Lord will appoint for it a distant term.

عالم الغيب فلا يظهر على غيبه أحدا
"He (alone) knows the Unseen, nor does He make any one acquainted with His Mysteries,-

إلا من ارتضى من رسول فإنه يسلك من بين يديه ومن خلفه رصدا
"Except a messenger whom He has chosen: and then He makes a band of watchers march before him and behind him,

ليعلم أن قد أبلغوا رسالات ربهم وأحاط بما لديهم وأحصى كل شيء عددا
"That He may know that they have (truly) brought and delivered the Messages of their Lord: and He surrounds (all the mysteries) that are with them, and takes account of every single thing."

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم يا أيها المزمل
O thou folded in garments!

قم الليل إلا قليلا
Stand (to prayer) by night, but not all night,-

نصفه أو انقص منه قليلا
Half of it,- or a little less,

أو زد عليه ورتل القرآن ترتيلا
Or a little more; and recite the Qur'an in slow, measured rhythmic tones.

إنا سنلقي عليك قولا ثقيلا
Soon shall We send down to thee a weighty Message.

إن ناشئة الليل هي أشد وطئا وأقوم قيلا
Truly the rising by night is most potent for governing (the soul), and most suitable for (framing) the Word (of Prayer and Praise).

إن لك في النهار سبحا طويلا
True, there is for thee by day prolonged occupation with ordinary duties:

واذكر اسم ربك وتبتل إليه تبتيلا
But keep in remembrance the name of thy Lord and devote thyself to Him whole-heartedly.

رب المشرق والمغرب لا إله إلا هو فاتخذه وكيلا
(He is) Lord of the East and the West: there is no god but He: take Him therefore for (thy) Disposer of Affairs.

واصبر على ما يقولون واهجرهم هجرا جميلا
And have patience with what they say, and leave them with noble (dignity).

وذرني والمكذبين أولي النعمة ومهلهم قليلا
And leave Me (alone to deal with) those in possession of the good things of life, who (yet) deny the Truth; and bear with them for a little while.

إن لدينا أنكالا وجحيما
With Us are Fetters (to bind them), and a Fire (to burn them),

وطعاما ذا غصة وعذابا أليما
And a Food that chokes, and a Penalty Grievous.

يوم ترجف الأرض والجبال وكانت الجبال كثيبا مهيلا
One Day the earth and the mountains will be in violent commotion. And the mountains will be as a heap of sand poured out and flowing down.

إنا أرسلنا إليكم رسولا شاهدا عليكم كما أرسلنا إلى فرعون رسولا
We have sent to you, (O men!) a messenger, to be a witness concerning you, even as We sent a messenger to Pharaoh.

فعصى فرعون الرسول فأخذناه أخذا وبيلا
But Pharaoh disobeyed the messenger; so We seized him with a heavy Punishment.

فكيف تتقون إن كفرتم يوما يجعل الولدان شيبا
Then how shall ye, if ye deny (Allah), guard yourselves against a Day that will make children hoary-headed?-

السماء منفطر به كان وعده مفعولا
Whereon the sky will be cleft asunder? His Promise needs must be accomplished.

إن هذه تذكرة فمن شاء اتخذ إلى ربه سبيلا
Verily this is an Admonition: therefore, whoso will, let him take a (straight) path to his Lord!

إن ربك يعلم أنك تقوم أدنى من ثلثي الليل ونصفه وثلثه وطائفة من الذين معك والله يقدر الليل والنهار علم أن لن تحصوه فتاب عليكم فاقرءوا ما تيسر من القرآن علم أن سيكون منكم مرضى وآخرون يضربون في الأرض يبتغون من فضل الله وآخرون يقاتلون في سبيل الله فاقرءوا ما تيسر منه وأقيموا الصلاة وآتوا الزكاة وأقرضوا الله قرضا حسنا وما تقدموا لأنفسكم من خير تجدوه عند الله هو خيرا وأعظم أجرا واستغفروا الله إن الله غفور رحيم
Thy Lord doth know that thou standest forth (to prayer) nigh two-thirds of the night, or half the night, or a third of the night, and so doth a party of those with thee. But Allah doth appoint night and day in due measure He knoweth that ye are unable to keep count thereof. So He hath turned to you (in mercy): read ye, therefore, of the Qur'an as much as may be easy for you. He knoweth that there may be (some) among you in ill-health; others travelling through the land, seeking of Allah's bounty; yet others fighting in Allah's Cause, read ye, therefore, as much of the Qur'an as may be easy (for you); and establish regular Prayer and give regular Charity; and loan to Allah a Beautiful Loan. And whatever good ye send forth for your souls ye shall find it in Allah's Presence,- yea, better and greater, in Reward and seek ye the Grace of Allah: for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم يا أيها المدثر
O thou wrapped up (in the mantle)!

قم فأنذر
Arise and deliver thy warning!

وربك فكبر
And thy Lord do thou magnify!

وثيابك فطهر
And thy garments keep free from stain!

والرجز فاهجر
And all abomination shun!

ولا تمنن تستكثر
Nor expect, in giving, any increase (for thyself)!

ولربك فاصبر
But, for thy Lord's (Cause), be patient and constant!

فإذا نقر في الناقور
Finally, when the Trumpet is sounded,

فذلك يومئذ يوم عسير
That will be- that Day - a Day of Distress,-

على الكافرين غير يسير
Far from easy for those without Faith.

ذرني ومن خلقت وحيدا
Leave Me alone, (to deal) with the (creature) whom I created (bare and) alone!-

وجعلت له مالا ممدودا
To whom I granted resources in abundance,

وبنين شهودا
And sons to be by his side!-

ومهدت له تمهيدا
To whom I made (life) smooth and comfortable!

ثم يطمع أن أزيد
Yet is he greedy-that I should add (yet more);-

كلا إنه كان لآياتنا عنيدا
By no means! For to Our Signs he has been refractory!

سأرهقه صعودا
Soon will I visit him with a mount of calamities!

إنه فكر وقدر
For he thought and he plotted;-

فقتل كيف قدر
And woe to him! How he plotted!-

ثم قتل كيف قدر
Yea, Woe to him; How he plotted!-

ثم نظر
Then he looked round;

ثم عبس وبسر
Then he frowned and he scowled;

ثم أدبر واستكبر
Then he turned back and was haughty;

فقال إن هذا إلا سحر يؤثر
Then said he: "This is nothing but magic, derived from of old;

إن هذا إلا قول البشر
"This is nothing but the word of a mortal!"

سأصليه سقر
Soon will I cast him into Hell-Fire!

وما أدراك ما سقر
And what will explain to thee what Hell-Fire is?

لا تبقي ولا تذر
Naught doth it permit to endure, and naught doth it leave alone!-

لواحة للبشر
Darkening and changing the colour of man!

عليها تسعة عشر
Over it are Nineteen.

وما جعلنا أصحاب النار إلا ملائكة وما جعلنا عدتهم إلا فتنة للذين كفروا ليستيقن الذين أوتوا الكتاب ويزداد الذين آمنوا إيمانا ولا يرتاب الذين أوتوا الكتاب والمؤمنون وليقول الذين في قلوبهم مرض والكافرون ماذا أراد الله بهذا مثلا كذلك يضل الله من يشاء ويهدي من يشاء وما يعلم جنود ربك إلا هو وما هي إلا ذكرى للبشر
And We have set none but angels as Guardians of the Fire; and We have fixed their number only as a trial for Unbelievers,- in order that the People of the Book may arrive at certainty, and the Believers may increase in Faith,- and that no doubts may be left for the People of the Book and the Believers, and that those in whose hearts is a disease and the Unbelievers may say, "What symbol doth Allah intend by this?" Thus doth Allah leave to stray whom He pleaseth, and guide whom He pleaseth: and none can know the forces of thy Lord, except He and this is no other than a warning to mankind.

كلا والقمر
Nay, verily: By the Moon,

والليل إذ أدبر
And by the Night as it retreateth,

والصبح إذا أسفر
And by the Dawn as it shineth forth,-

إنها لإحدى الكبر
This is but one of the mighty (portents),

نذيرا للبشر
A warning to mankind,-

لمن شاء منكم أن يتقدم أو يتأخر
To any of you that chooses to press forward, or to follow behind;-

كل نفس بما كسبت رهينة
Every soul will be (held) in pledge for its deeds.

إلا أصحاب اليمين
Except the Companions of the Right Hand.

في جنات يتساءلون
(They will be) in Gardens (of Delight): they will question each other,

عن المجرمين
And (ask) of the Sinners:

ما سلككم في سقر
"What led you into Hell Fire?"

قالوا لم نك من المصلين
They will say: "We were not of those who prayed;

ولم نك نطعم المسكين
"Nor were we of those who fed the indigent;

وكنا نخوض مع الخائضين
"But we used to talk vanities with vain talkers;

وكنا نكذب بيوم الدين
"And we used to deny the Day of Judgment,

حتى أتانا اليقين
"Until there came to us (the Hour) that is certain."

فما تنفعهم شفاعة الشافعين
Then will no intercession of (any) intercessors profit them.

فما لهم عن التذكرة معرضين
Then what is the matter with them that they turn away from admonition?-

كأنهم حمر مستنفرة
As if they were affrighted asses,

فرت من قسورة
Fleeing from a lion!

بل يريد كل امرئ منهم أن يؤتى صحفا منشرة
Forsooth, each one of them wants to be given scrolls (of revelation) spread out!

كلا بل لا يخافون الآخرة
By no means! But they fear not the Hereafter,

كلا إنه تذكرة
Nay, this surely is an admonition:

فمن شاء ذكره
Let any who will, keep it in remembrance!

وما يذكرون إلا أن يشاء الله هو أهل التقوى وأهل المغفرة
But none will keep it in remembrance except as Allah wills: He is the Lord of Righteousness, and the Lord of Forgiveness.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم لا أقسم بيوم القيامة
I do call to witness the Resurrection Day;

ولا أقسم بالنفس اللوامة
And I do call to witness the self-reproaching spirit: (Eschew Evil).

أيحسب الإنسان ألن نجمع عظامه
Does man think that We cannot assemble his bones?

بلى قادرين على أن نسوي بنانه
Nay, We are able to put together in perfect order the very tips of his fingers.

بل يريد الإنسان ليفجر أمامه
But man wishes to do wrong (even) in the time in front of him.

يسأل أيان يوم القيامة
He questions: "When is the Day of Resurrection?"

فإذا برق البصر
At length, when the sight is dazed,

وخسف القمر
And the moon is buried in darkness.

وجمع الشمس والقمر
And the sun and moon are joined together,-

يقول الإنسان يومئذ أين المفر
That Day will Man say: "Where is the refuge?"

كلا لا وزر
By no means! No place of safety!

إلى ربك يومئذ المستقر
Before thy Lord (alone), that Day will be the place of rest.

ينبأ الإنسان يومئذ بما قدم وأخر
That Day will Man be told (all) that he put forward, and all that he put back.

بل الإنسان على نفسه بصيرة
Nay, man will be evidence against himself,

ولو ألقى معاذيره
Even though he were to put up his excuses.

لا تحرك به لسانك لتعجل به
Move not thy tongue concerning the (Qur'an) to make haste therewith.

إن علينا جمعه وقرآنه
It is for Us to collect it and to promulgate it:

فإذا قرأناه فاتبع قرآنه
But when We have promulgated it, follow thou its recital (as promulgated):

ثم إن علينا بيانه
Nay more, it is for Us to explain it (and make it clear):

كلا بل تحبون العاجلة
Nay, (ye men!) but ye love the fleeting life,

وتذرون الآخرة
And leave alone the Hereafter.

وجوه يومئذ ناضرة
Some faces, that Day, will beam (in brightness and beauty);-

إلى ربها ناظرة
Looking towards their Lord;

ووجوه يومئذ باسرة
And some faces, that Day, will be sad and dismal,

تظن أن يفعل بها فاقرة
In the thought that some back-breaking calamity was about to be inflicted on them;

كلا إذا بلغت التراقي
Yea, when (the soul) reaches to the collar-bone (in its exit),

وقيل من راق
And there will be a cry, "Who is a magician (to restore him)?"

وظن أنه الفراق
And he will conclude that it was (the Time) of Parting;

والتفت الساق بالساق
And one leg will be joined with another:

إلى ربك يومئذ المساق
That Day the Drive will be (all) to thy Lord!

فلا صدق ولا صلى
So he gave nothing in charity, nor did he pray!-

ولكن كذب وتولى
But on the contrary, he rejected Truth and turned away!

ثم ذهب إلى أهله يتمطى
Then did he stalk to his family in full conceit!

أولى لك فأولى
Woe to thee, (O men!), yea, woe!

ثم أولى لك فأولى
Again, Woe to thee, (O men!), yea, woe!

أيحسب الإنسان أن يترك سدى
Does man think that he will be left uncontrolled, (without purpose)?

ألم يك نطفة من مني يمنى
Was he not a drop of sperm emitted (in lowly form)?

ثم كان علقة فخلق فسوى
Then did he become a leech-like clot; then did (Allah) make and fashion (him) in due proportion.

فجعل منه الزوجين الذكر والأنثى
And of him He made two sexes, male and female.

أليس ذلك بقادر على أن يحيي الموتى
Has not He, (the same), the power to give life to the dead?

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم هل أتى على الإنسان حين من الدهر لم يكن شيئا مذكورا
Has there not been over Man a long period of Time, when he was nothing - (not even) mentioned?

إنا خلقنا الإنسان من نطفة أمشاج نبتليه فجعلناه سميعا بصيرا
Verily We created Man from a drop of mingled sperm, in order to try him: So We gave him (the gifts), of Hearing and Sight.

إنا هديناه السبيل إما شاكرا وإما كفورا
We showed him the Way: whether he be grateful or ungrateful (rests on his will).

إنا أعتدنا للكافرين سلاسل وأغلالا وسعيرا
For the Rejecters we have prepared chains, yokes, and a blazing Fire.

إن الأبرار يشربون من كأس كان مزاجها كافورا
As to the Righteous, they shall drink of a Cup (of Wine) mixed with Kafur,-

عينا يشرب بها عباد الله يفجرونها تفجيرا
A Fountain where the Devotees of Allah do drink, making it flow in unstinted abundance.

يوفون بالنذر ويخافون يوما كان شره مستطيرا
They perform (their) vows, and they fear a Day whose evil flies far and wide.

ويطعمون الطعام على حبه مسكينا ويتيما وأسيرا
And they feed, for the love of Allah, the indigent, the orphan, and the captive,-

إنما نطعمكم لوجه الله لا نريد منكم جزاء ولا شكورا
(Saying),"We feed you for the sake of Allah alone: no reward do we desire from you, nor thanks.

إنا نخاف من ربنا يوما عبوسا قمطريرا
"We only fear a Day of distressful Wrath from the side of our Lord."

فوقاهم الله شر ذلك اليوم ولقاهم نضرة وسرورا
But Allah will deliver them from the evil of that Day, and will shed over them a Light of Beauty and (blissful) Joy.

وجزاهم بما صبروا جنة وحريرا
And because they were patient and constant, He will reward them with a Garden and (garments of) silk.

متكئين فيها على الأرائك لا يرون فيها شمسا ولا زمهريرا
Reclining in the (Garden) on raised thrones, they will see there neither the sun's (excessive heat) nor (the moon's) excessive cold.

ودانية عليهم ظلالها وذللت قطوفها تذليلا
And the shades of the (Garden) will come low over them, and the bunches (of fruit), there, will hang low in humility.

ويطاف عليهم بآنية من فضة وأكواب كانت قواريرا
And amongst them will be passed round vessels of silver and goblets of crystal,-

قوارير من فضة قدروها تقديرا
Crystal-clear, made of silver: they will determine the measure thereof (according to their wishes).

ويسقون فيها كأسا كان مزاجها زنجبيلا
And they will be given to drink there of a Cup (of Wine) mixed with Zanjabil,-

عينا فيها تسمى سلسبيلا
A fountain there, called Salsabil.

ويطوف عليهم ولدان مخلدون إذا رأيتهم حسبتهم لؤلؤا منثورا
And round about them will (serve) youths of perpetual (freshness): If thou seest them, thou wouldst think them scattered Pearls.

وإذا رأيت ثم رأيت نعيما وملكا كبيرا
And when thou lookest, it is there thou wilt see a Bliss and a Realm Magnificent.

عاليهم ثياب سندس خضر وإستبرق وحلوا أساور من فضة وسقاهم ربهم شرابا طهورا
Upon them will be green Garments of fine silk and heavy brocade, and they will be adorned with Bracelets of silver; and their Lord will give to them to drink of a Wine Pure and Holy.

إن هذا كان لكم جزاء وكان سعيكم مشكورا
"Verily this is a Reward for you, and your Endeavour is accepted and recognised."

إنا نحن نزلنا عليك القرآن تنزيلا
It is We Who have sent down the Qur'an to thee by stages.

فاصبر لحكم ربك ولا تطع منهم آثما أو كفورا
Therefore be patient with constancy to the Command of thy Lord, and hearken not to the sinner or the ingrate among them.

واذكر اسم ربك بكرة وأصيلا
And celebrate the name of thy Lord morning and evening,

ومن الليل فاسجد له وسبحه ليلا طويلا
And part of the night, prostrate thyself to Him; and glorify Him a long night through.

إن هؤلاء يحبون العاجلة ويذرون وراءهم يوما ثقيلا
As to these, they love the fleeting life, and put away behind them a Day (that will be) hard.

نحن خلقناهم وشددنا أسرهم وإذا شئنا بدلنا أمثالهم تبديلا
It is We Who created them, and We have made their joints strong; but, when We will, We can substitute the like of them by a complete change.

إن هذه تذكرة فمن شاء اتخذ إلى ربه سبيلا
This is an admonition: Whosoever will, let him take a (straight) Path to his Lord.

وما تشاءون إلا أن يشاء الله إن الله كان عليما حكيما
But ye will not, except as Allah wills; for Allah is full of Knowledge and Wisdom.

يدخل من يشاء في رحمته والظالمين أعد لهم عذابا أليما
He will admit to His Mercy whom He will; But the wrong-doers,- for them has He prepared a grievous Penalty.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم والمرسلات عرفا
By the (Winds) sent forth one after another (to man's profit);

فالعاصفات عصفا
Which then blow violently in tempestuous Gusts,

والناشرات نشرا
And scatter (things) far and wide;

فالفارقات فرقا
Then separate them, one from another,

فالملقيات ذكرا
Then spread abroad a Message,

عذرا أو نذرا
Whether of Justification or of Warning;-

إنما توعدون لواقع
Assuredly, what ye are promised must come to pass.

فإذا النجوم طمست
Then when the stars become dim;

وإذا السماء فرجت
When the heaven is cleft asunder;

وإذا الجبال نسفت
When the mountains are scattered (to the winds) as dust;

وإذا الرسل أقتت
And when the messengers are (all) appointed a time (to collect);-

لأي يوم أجلت
For what Day are these (portents) deferred?

ليوم الفصل
For the Day of Sorting out.

وما أدراك ما يوم الفصل
And what will explain to thee what is the Day of Sorting out?

ويل يومئذ للمكذبين
Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

ألم نهلك الأولين
Did We not destroy the men of old (for their evil)?

ثم نتبعهم الآخرين
So shall We make later (generations) follow them.

كذلك نفعل بالمجرمين
Thus do We deal with men of sin.

ويل يومئذ للمكذبين
Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

ألم نخلقكم من ماء مهين
Have We not created you from a fluid (held) despicable?-

فجعلناه في قرار مكين
The which We placed in a place of rest, firmly fixed,

إلى قدر معلوم
For a period (of gestation), determined (according to need)?

فقدرنا فنعم القادرون
For We do determine (according to need); for We are the best to determine (things).

ويل يومئذ للمكذبين
Ah woe, that Day! to the Rejecters of Truth!

ألم نجعل الأرض كفاتا
Have We not made the earth (as a place) to draw together.

أحياء وأمواتا
The living and the dead,

وجعلنا فيها رواسي شامخات وأسقيناكم ماء فراتا
And made therein mountains standing firm, lofty (in stature); and provided for you water sweet (and wholesome)?

ويل يومئذ للمكذبين
Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

انطلقوا إلى ما كنتم به تكذبون
(It will be said:) "Depart ye to that which ye used to reject as false!

انطلقوا إلى ظل ذي ثلاث شعب
"Depart ye to a Shadow (of smoke ascending) in three columns,

لا ظليل ولا يغني من اللهب
"(Which yields) no shade of coolness, and is of no use against the fierce Blaze.

إنها ترمي بشرر كالقصر
"Indeed it throws about sparks (huge) as Forts,

كأنه جمالت صفر
"As if there were (a string of) yellow camels (marching swiftly)."

ويل يومئذ للمكذبين
Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

هذا يوم لا ينطقون
That will be a Day when they shall not be able to speak.

ولا يؤذن لهم فيعتذرون
Nor will it be open to them to put forth pleas.

ويل يومئذ للمكذبين
Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

هذا يوم الفصل جمعناكم والأولين
That will be a Day of Sorting out! We shall gather you together and those before (you)!

فإن كان لكم كيد فكيدون
Now, if ye have a trick (or plot), use it against Me!

ويل يومئذ للمكذبين
Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

إن المتقين في ظلال وعيون
As to the Righteous, they shall be amidst (cool) shades and springs (of water).

وفواكه مما يشتهون
And (they shall have) fruits,- all they desire.

كلوا واشربوا هنيئا بما كنتم تعملون
"Eat ye and drink ye to your heart's content: for that ye worked (Righteousness).

إنا كذلك نجزي المحسنين
Thus do We certainly reward the Doers of Good.

ويل يومئذ للمكذبين
Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

كلوا وتمتعوا قليلا إنكم مجرمون
(O ye unjust!) Eat ye and enjoy yourselves (but) a little while, for that ye are Sinners.

ويل يومئذ للمكذبين
Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

وإذا قيل لهم اركعوا لا يركعون
And when it is said to them, "Prostrate yourselves!" they do not so.

ويل يومئذ للمكذبين
Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

فبأي حديث بعده يؤمنون
Then what Message, after that, will they believe in?

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم عم يتساءلون
Concerning what are they disputing?

عن النبإ العظيم
Concerning the Great News,

الذي هم فيه مختلفون
About which they cannot agree.

كلا سيعلمون
Verily, they shall soon (come to) know!

ثم كلا سيعلمون
Verily, verily they shall soon (come to) know!

ألم نجعل الأرض مهادا
Have We not made the earth as a wide expanse,

والجبال أوتادا
And the mountains as pegs?

وخلقناكم أزواجا
And (have We not) created you in pairs,

وجعلنا نومكم سباتا
And made your sleep for rest,

وجعلنا الليل لباسا
And made the night as a covering,

وجعلنا النهار معاشا
And made the day as a means of subsistence?

وبنينا فوقكم سبعا شدادا
And (have We not) built over you the seven firmaments,

وجعلنا سراجا وهاجا
And placed (therein) a Light of Splendour?

وأنزلنا من المعصرات ماء ثجاجا
And do We not send down from the clouds water in abundance,

لنخرج به حبا ونباتا
That We may produce therewith corn and vegetables,

وجنات ألفافا
And gardens of luxurious growth?

إن يوم الفصل كان ميقاتا
Verily the Day of Sorting out is a thing appointed,

يوم ينفخ في الصور فتأتون أفواجا
The Day that the Trumpet shall be sounded, and ye shall come forth in crowds;

وفتحت السماء فكانت أبوابا
And the heavens shall be opened as if there were doors,

وسيرت الجبال فكانت سرابا
And the mountains shall vanish, as if they were a mirage.

إن جهنم كانت مرصادا
Truly Hell is as a place of ambush,

للطاغين مآبا
For the transgressors a place of destination:

لابثين فيها أحقابا
They will dwell therein for ages.

لا يذوقون فيها بردا ولا شرابا
Nothing cool shall they taste therein, nor any drink,

إلا حميما وغساقا
Save a boiling fluid and a fluid, dark, murky, intensely cold,

جزاء وفاقا
A fitting recompense (for them).

إنهم كانوا لا يرجون حسابا
For that they used not to fear any account (for their deeds),

وكذبوا بآياتنا كذابا
But they (impudently) treated Our Signs as false.

وكل شيء أحصيناه كتابا
And all things have We preserved on record.

فذوقوا فلن نزيدكم إلا عذابا
"So taste ye (the fruits of your deeds); for no increase shall We grant you, except in Punishment."

إن للمتقين مفازا
Verily for the Righteous there will be a fulfilment of (the heart's) desires;

حدائق وأعنابا
Gardens enclosed, and grapevines;

وكواعب أترابا
And voluptuous women of equal age;

وكأسا دهاقا
And a cup full (to the brim).

لا يسمعون فيها لغوا ولا كذابا
No vanity shall they hear therein, nor Untruth:-

جزاء من ربك عطاء حسابا
Recompense from thy Lord, a gift, (amply) sufficient,

رب السماوات والأرض وما بينهما الرحمن لا يملكون منه خطابا
(From) the Lord of the heavens and the earth, and all between, (Allah) Most Gracious: None shall have power to argue with Him.

يوم يقوم الروح والملائكة صفا لا يتكلمون إلا من أذن له الرحمن وقال صوابا
The Day that the Spirit and the angels will stand forth in ranks, none shall speak except any who is permitted by (Allah) Most Gracious, and He will say what is right.

ذلك اليوم الحق فمن شاء اتخذ إلى ربه مآبا
That Day will be the sure Reality: Therefore, whoso will, let him take a (straight) return to his Lord!

إنا أنذرناكم عذابا قريبا يوم ينظر المرء ما قدمت يداه ويقول الكافر يا ليتني كنت ترابا
Verily, We have warned you of a Penalty near, the Day when man will see (the deeds) which his hands have sent forth, and the Unbeliever will say, "Woe unto me! Would that I were (metre) dust!"

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم والنازعات غرقا
By the (angels) who tear out (the souls of the wicked) with violence;

والناشطات نشطا
By those who gently draw out (the souls of the blessed);

والسابحات سبحا
And by those who glide along (on errands of mercy),

فالسابقات سبقا
Then press forward as in a race,

فالمدبرات أمرا
Then arrange to do (the Commands of their Lord),

يوم ترجف الراجفة
One Day everything that can be in commotion will be in violent commotion,

تتبعها الرادفة
Followed by oft-repeated (commotions):

قلوب يومئذ واجفة
Hearts that Day will be in agitation;

أبصارها خاشعة
Cast down will be (their owners') eyes.

يقولون أإنا لمردودون في الحافرة
They say (now): "What! shall we indeed be returned to (our) former state?

أإذا كنا عظاما نخرة
"What! - when we shall have become rotten bones?"

قالوا تلك إذا كرة خاسرة
They say: "It would, in that case, be a return with loss!"

فإنما هي زجرة واحدة
But verily, it will be but a single (Compelling) Cry,

فإذا هم بالساهرة
When, behold, they will be in the (full) awakening (to Judgment).

هل أتاك حديث موسى
Has the story of Moses reached thee?

إذ ناداه ربه بالواد المقدس طوى
Behold, thy Lord did call to him in the sacred valley of Tuwa:-

اذهب إلى فرعون إنه طغى
"Go thou to Pharaoh for he has indeed transgressed all bounds:

فقل هل لك إلى أن تزكى
"And say to him, 'Wouldst thou that thou shouldst be purified (from sin)?-

وأهديك إلى ربك فتخشى
"'And that I guide thee to thy Lord, so thou shouldst fear Him?'"

فأراه الآية الكبرى
Then did (Moses) show him the Great Sign.

فكذب وعصى
But (Pharaoh) rejected it and disobeyed (guidance);

ثم أدبر يسعى
Further, he turned his back, striving hard (against Allah).

فحشر فنادى
Then he collected (his men) and made a proclamation,

فقال أنا ربكم الأعلى
Saying, "I am your Lord, Most High".

فأخذه الله نكال الآخرة والأولى
But Allah did punish him, (and made an) example of him, - in the Hereafter, as in this life.

إن في ذلك لعبرة لمن يخشى
Verily in this is an instructive warning for whosoever feareth (Allah).

أأنتم أشد خلقا أم السماء بناها
What! Are ye the more difficult to create or the heaven (above)? (Allah) hath constructed it:

رفع سمكها فسواها
On high hath He raised its canopy, and He hath given it order and perfection.

وأغطش ليلها وأخرج ضحاها
Its night doth He endow with darkness, and its splendour doth He bring out (with light).

والأرض بعد ذلك دحاها
And the earth, moreover, hath He extended (to a wide expanse);

أخرج منها ماءها ومرعاها
He draweth out therefrom its moisture and its pasture;

والجبال أرساها
And the mountains hath He firmly fixed;-

متاعا لكم ولأنعامكم
For use and convenience to you and your cattle.

فإذا جاءت الطامة الكبرى
Therefore, when there comes the great, overwhelming (Event),-

يوم يتذكر الإنسان ما سعى
The Day when man shall remember (all) that he strove for,

وبرزت الجحيم لمن يرى
And Hell-Fire shall be placed in full view for (all) to see,-

فأما من طغى
Then, for such as had transgressed all bounds,

وآثر الحياة الدنيا
And had preferred the life of this world,

فإن الجحيم هي المأوى
The Abode will be Hell-Fire;

وأما من خاف مقام ربه ونهى النفس عن الهوى
And for such as had entertained the fear of standing before their Lord's (tribunal) and had restrained (their) soul from lower desires,

فإن الجنة هي المأوى
Their abode will be the Garden.

يسألونك عن الساعة أيان مرساها
They ask thee about the Hour,-'When will be its appointed time?

فيم أنت من ذكراها
Wherein art thou (concerned) with the declaration thereof?

إلى ربك منتهاها
With thy Lord in the Limit fixed therefor.

إنما أنت منذر من يخشاها
Thou art but a Warner for such as fear it.

كأنهم يوم يرونها لم يلبثوا إلا عشية أو ضحاها
The Day they see it, (It will be) as if they had tarried but a single evening, or (at most till) the following morn!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم عبس وتولى
(The Prophet) frowned and turned away,

أن جاءه الأعمى
Because there came to him the blind man (interrupting).

وما يدريك لعله يزكى
But what could tell thee but that perchance he might grow (in spiritual understanding)?-

أو يذكر فتنفعه الذكرى
Or that he might receive admonition, and the teaching might profit him?

أما من استغنى
As to one who regards Himself as self-sufficient,

فأنت له تصدى
To him dost thou attend;

وما عليك ألا يزكى
Though it is no blame to thee if he grow not (in spiritual understanding).

وأما من جاءك يسعى
But as to him who came to thee striving earnestly,

وهو يخشى
And with fear (in his heart),

فأنت عنه تلهى
Of him wast thou unmindful.

كلا إنها تذكرة
By no means (should it be so)! For it is indeed a Message of instruction:

فمن شاء ذكره
Therefore let whoso will, keep it in remembrance.

في صحف مكرمة
(It is) in Books held (greatly) in honour,

مرفوعة مطهرة
Exalted (in dignity), kept pure and holy,

بأيدي سفرة
(Written) by the hands of scribes-

كرام بررة
Honourable and Pious and Just.

قتل الإنسان ما أكفره
Woe to man! What hath made him reject Allah;

من أي شيء خلقه
From what stuff hath He created him?

من نطفة خلقه فقدره
From a sperm-drop: He hath created him, and then mouldeth him in due proportions;

ثم السبيل يسره
Then doth He make His path smooth for him;

ثم أماته فأقبره
Then He causeth him to die, and putteth him in his grave;

ثم إذا شاء أنشره
Then, when it is His Will, He will raise him up (again).

كلا لما يقض ما أمره
By no means hath he fulfilled what Allah hath commanded him.

فلينظر الإنسان إلى طعامه
Then let man look at his food, (and how We provide it):

أنا صببنا الماء صبا
For that We pour forth water in abundance,

ثم شققنا الأرض شقا
And We split the earth in fragments,

فأنبتنا فيها حبا
And produce therein corn,

وعنبا وقضبا
And Grapes and nutritious plants,

وزيتونا ونخلا
And Olives and Dates,

وحدائق غلبا
And enclosed Gardens, dense with lofty trees,

وفاكهة وأبا
And fruits and fodder,-

متاعا لكم ولأنعامكم
For use and convenience to you and your cattle.

فإذا جاءت الصاخة
At length, when there comes the Deafening Noise,-

يوم يفر المرء من أخيه
That Day shall a man flee from his own brother,

وأمه وأبيه
And from his mother and his father,

وصاحبته وبنيه
And from his wife and his children.

لكل امرئ منهم يومئذ شأن يغنيه
Each one of them, that Day, will have enough concern (of his own) to make him indifferent to the others.

وجوه يومئذ مسفرة
Some faces that Day will be beaming,

ضاحكة مستبشرة
Laughing, rejoicing.

ووجوه يومئذ عليها غبرة
And other faces that Day will be dust-stained,

ترهقها قترة
Blackness will cover them:

أولئك هم الكفرة الفجرة
Such will be the Rejecters of Allah, the doers of iniquity.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم إذا الشمس كورت
When the sun (with its spacious light) is folded up;

وإذا النجوم انكدرت
When the stars fall, losing their lustre;

وإذا الجبال سيرت
When the mountains vanish (like a mirage);

وإذا العشار عطلت
When the she-camels, ten months with young, are left untended;

وإذا الوحوش حشرت
When the wild beasts are herded together (in the human habitations);

وإذا البحار سجرت
When the oceans boil over with a swell;

وإذا النفوس زوجت
When the souls are sorted out, (being joined, like with like);

وإذا الموءودة سئلت
When the female (infant), buried alive, is questioned -

بأي ذنب قتلت
For what crime she was killed;

وإذا الصحف نشرت
When the scrolls are laid open;

وإذا السماء كشطت
When the world on High is unveiled;

وإذا الجحيم سعرت
When the Blazing Fire is kindled to fierce heat;

وإذا الجنة أزلفت
And when the Garden is brought near;-

علمت نفس ما أحضرت
(Then) shall each soul know what it has put forward.

فلا أقسم بالخنس
So verily I call to witness the planets - that recede,

الجوار الكنس
Go straight, or hide;

والليل إذا عسعس
And the Night as it dissipates;

والصبح إذا تنفس
And the Dawn as it breathes away the darkness;-

إنه لقول رسول كريم
Verily this is the word of a most honourable Messenger,

ذي قوة عند ذي العرش مكين
Endued with Power, with rank before the Lord of the Throne,

مطاع ثم أمين
With authority there, (and) faithful to his trust.

وما صاحبكم بمجنون
And (O people!) your companion is not one possessed;

ولقد رآه بالأفق المبين
And without doubt he saw him in the clear horizon.

وما هو على الغيب بضنين
Neither doth he withhold grudgingly a knowledge of the Unseen.

وما هو بقول شيطان رجيم
Nor is it the word of an evil spirit accursed.

فأين تذهبون
When whither go ye?

إن هو إلا ذكر للعالمين
Verily this is no less than a Message to (all) the Worlds:

لمن شاء منكم أن يستقيم
(With profit) to whoever among you wills to go straight:

وما تشاءون إلا أن يشاء الله رب العالمين
But ye shall not will except as Allah wills,- the Cherisher of the Worlds.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم إذا السماء انفطرت
When the Sky is cleft asunder;

وإذا الكواكب انتثرت
When the Stars are scattered;

وإذا البحار فجرت
When the Oceans are suffered to burst forth;

وإذا القبور بعثرت
And when the Graves are turned upside down;-

علمت نفس ما قدمت وأخرت
(Then) shall each soul know what it hath sent forward and (what it hath) kept back.

يا أيها الإنسان ما غرك بربك الكريم
O man! What has seduced thee from thy Lord Most Beneficent?-

الذي خلقك فسواك فعدلك
Him Who created thee. Fashioned thee in due proportion, and gave thee a just bias;

في أي صورة ما شاء ركبك
In whatever Form He wills, does He put thee together.

كلا بل تكذبون بالدين
Nay! But ye do reject Right and Judgment!

وإن عليكم لحافظين
But verily over you (are appointed angels) to protect you,-

كراما كاتبين
Kind and honourable,- Writing down (your deeds):

يعلمون ما تفعلون
They know (and understand) all that ye do.

إن الأبرار لفي نعيم
As for the Righteous, they will be in bliss;

وإن الفجار لفي جحيم
And the Wicked - they will be in the Fire,

يصلونها يوم الدين
Which they will enter on the Day of Judgment,

وما هم عنها بغائبين
And they will not be able to keep away therefrom.

وما أدراك ما يوم الدين
And what will explain to thee what the Day of Judgment is?

ثم ما أدراك ما يوم الدين
Again, what will explain to thee what the Day of Judgment is?

يوم لا تملك نفس لنفس شيئا والأمر يومئذ لله
(It will be) the Day when no soul shall have power (to do) aught for another: For the command, that Day, will be (wholly) with Allah.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم ويل للمطففين
Woe to those that deal in fraud,-

الذين إذا اكتالوا على الناس يستوفون
Those who, when they have to receive by measure from men, exact full measure,

وإذا كالوهم أو وزنوهم يخسرون
But when they have to give by measure or weight to men, give less than due.

ألا يظن أولئك أنهم مبعوثون
Do they not think that they will be called to account?-

ليوم عظيم
On a Mighty Day,

يوم يقوم الناس لرب العالمين
A Day when (all) mankind will stand before the Lord of the Worlds?

كلا إن كتاب الفجار لفي سجين
Nay! Surely the record of the wicked is (preserved) in Sijjin.

وما أدراك ما سجين
And what will explain to thee what Sijjin is?

كتاب مرقوم
(There is) a Register (fully) inscribed.

ويل يومئذ للمكذبين
Woe, that Day, to those that deny-

الذين يكذبون بيوم الدين
Those that deny the Day of Judgment.

وما يكذب به إلا كل معتد أثيم
And none can deny it but the Transgressor beyond bounds the Sinner!

إذا تتلى عليه آياتنا قال أساطير الأولين
When Our Signs are rehearsed to him, he says, "Tales of the ancients!"

كلا بل ران على قلوبهم ما كانوا يكسبون
By no means! but on their hearts is the stain of the (ill) which they do!

كلا إنهم عن ربهم يومئذ لمحجوبون
Verily, from (the Light of) their Lord, that Day, will they be veiled.

ثم إنهم لصالو الجحيم
Further, they will enter the Fire of Hell.

ثم يقال هذا الذي كنتم به تكذبون
Further, it will be said to them: "This is the (reality) which ye rejected as false!

كلا إن كتاب الأبرار لفي عليين
Nay, verily the record of the Righteous is (preserved) in 'Illiyin.

وما أدراك ما عليون
And what will explain to thee what 'Illiyun is?

كتاب مرقوم
(There is) a Register (fully) inscribed,

يشهده المقربون
To which bear witness those Nearest (to Allah).

إن الأبرار لفي نعيم
Truly the Righteous will be in Bliss:

على الأرائك ينظرون
On Thrones (of Dignity) will they command a sight (of all things):

تعرف في وجوههم نضرة النعيم
Thou wilt recognise in their faces the beaming brightness of Bliss.

يسقون من رحيق مختوم
Their thirst will be slaked with Pure Wine sealed:

ختامه مسك وفي ذلك فليتنافس المتنافسون
The seal thereof will be Musk: And for this let those aspire, who have aspirations:

ومزاجه من تسنيم
With it will be (given) a mixture of Tasnim:

عينا يشرب بها المقربون
A spring, from (the waters) whereof drink those Nearest to Allah.

إن الذين أجرموا كانوا من الذين آمنوا يضحكون
Those in sin used to laugh at those who believed,

وإذا مروا بهم يتغامزون
And whenever they passed by them, used to wink at each other (in mockery);

وإذا انقلبوا إلى أهلهم انقلبوا فكهين
And when they returned to their own people, they would return jesting;

وإذا رأوهم قالوا إن هؤلاء لضالون
And whenever they saw them, they would say, "Behold! These are the people truly astray!"

وما أرسلوا عليهم حافظين
But they had not been sent as keepers over them!

فاليوم الذين آمنوا من الكفار يضحكون
But on this Day the Believers will laugh at the Unbelievers:

على الأرائك ينظرون
On Thrones (of Dignity) they will command (a sight) (of all things).

هل ثوب الكفار ما كانوا يفعلون
Will not the Unbelievers have been paid back for what they did?

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم إذا السماء انشقت
When the sky is rent asunder,

وأذنت لربها وحقت
And hearkens to (the Command of) its Lord, and it must needs (do so);-

وإذا الأرض مدت
And when the earth is flattened out,

وألقت ما فيها وتخلت
And casts forth what is within it and becomes (clean) empty,

وأذنت لربها وحقت
And hearkens to (the Command of) its Lord,- and it must needs (do so);- (then will come Home the full reality).

يا أيها الإنسان إنك كادح إلى ربك كدحا فملاقيه
O thou man! Verily thou art ever toiling on towards thy Lord- painfully toiling,- but thou shalt meet Him.

فأما من أوتي كتابه بيمينه
Then he who is given his Record in his right hand,

فسوف يحاسب حسابا يسيرا
Soon will his account be taken by an easy reckoning,

وينقلب إلى أهله مسرورا
And he will turn to his people, rejoicing!

وأما من أوتي كتابه وراء ظهره
But he who is given his Record behind his back,-

فسوف يدعو ثبورا
Soon will he cry for perdition,

ويصلى سعيرا
And he will enter a Blazing Fire.

إنه كان في أهله مسرورا
Truly, did he go about among his people, rejoicing!

إنه ظن أن لن يحور
Truly, did he think that he would not have to return (to Us)!

بلى إن ربه كان به بصيرا
Nay, nay! for his Lord was (ever) watchful of him!

فلا أقسم بالشفق
So I do call to witness the ruddy glow of Sunset;

والليل وما وسق
The Night and its Homing;

والقمر إذا اتسق
And the Moon in her fullness:

لتركبن طبقا عن طبق
Ye shall surely travel from stage to stage.

فما لهم لا يؤمنون
What then is the matter with them, that they believe not?-

وإذا قرئ عليهم القرآن لا يسجدون
And when the Qur'an is read to them, they fall not prostrate,

بل الذين كفروا يكذبون
But on the contrary the Unbelievers reject (it).

والله أعلم بما يوعون
But Allah has full knowledge of what they secrete (in their breasts)

فبشرهم بعذاب أليم
So announce to them a Penalty Grievous,

إلا الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات لهم أجر غير ممنون
Except to those who believe and work righteous deeds: For them is a Reward that will never fail.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم والسماء ذات البروج
By the sky, (displaying) the Zodiacal Signs;

واليوم الموعود
By the promised Day (of Judgment);

وشاهد ومشهود
By one that witnesses, and the subject of the witness;-

قتل أصحاب الأخدود
Woe to the makers of the pit (of fire),

النار ذات الوقود
Fire supplied (abundantly) with fuel:

إذ هم عليها قعود
Behold! they sat over against the (fire),

وهم على ما يفعلون بالمؤمنين شهود
And they witnessed (all) that they were doing against the Believers.

وما نقموا منهم إلا أن يؤمنوا بالله العزيز الحميد
And they ill-treated them for no other reason than that they believed in Allah, Exalted in Power, Worthy of all Praise!-

الذي له ملك السماوات والأرض والله على كل شيء شهيد
Him to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth! And Allah is Witness to all things.

إن الذين فتنوا المؤمنين والمؤمنات ثم لم يتوبوا فلهم عذاب جهنم ولهم عذاب الحريق
Those who persecute (or draw into temptation) the Believers, men and women, and do not turn in repentance, will have the Penalty of Hell: They will have the Penalty of the Burning Fire.

إن الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات لهم جنات تجري من تحتها الأنهار ذلك الفوز الكبير
For those who believe and do righteous deeds, will be Gardens; beneath which rivers flow: That is the great Salvation, (the fulfilment of all desires),

إن بطش ربك لشديد
Truly strong is the Grip (and Power) of thy Lord.

إنه هو يبدئ ويعيد
It is He Who creates from the very beginning, and He can restore (life).

وهو الغفور الودود
And He is the Oft-Forgiving, Full of Loving-Kindness,

ذو العرش المجيد
Lord of the Throne of Glory,

فعال لما يريد
Doer (without let) of all that He intends.

هل أتاك حديث الجنود
Has the story reached thee, of the forces-

فرعون وثمود
Of Pharaoh and the Thamud?

بل الذين كفروا في تكذيب
And yet the Unbelievers (persist) in rejecting (the Truth)!

والله من ورائهم محيط
But Allah doth encompass them from behind!

بل هو قرآن مجيد
Nay, this is a Glorious Qur'an,

في لوح محفوظ
(Inscribed) in a Tablet Preserved!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم والسماء والطارق
By the Sky and the Night-Visitant (therein);-

وما أدراك ما الطارق
And what will explain to thee what the Night-Visitant is?-

النجم الثاقب
(It is) the Star of piercing brightness;-

إن كل نفس لما عليها حافظ
There is no soul but has a protector over it.

فلينظر الإنسان مم خلق
Now let man but think from what he is created!

خلق من ماء دافق
He is created from a drop emitted-

يخرج من بين الصلب والترائب
Proceeding from between the backbone and the ribs:

إنه على رجعه لقادر
Surely (Allah) is able to bring him back (to life)!

يوم تبلى السرائر
The Day that (all) things secret will be tested,

فما له من قوة ولا ناصر
(Man) will have no power, and no helper.

والسماء ذات الرجع
By the Firmament which returns (in its round),

والأرض ذات الصدع
And by the Earth which opens out (for the gushing of springs or the sprouting of vegetation),-

إنه لقول فصل
Behold this is the Word that distinguishes (Good from Evil):

وما هو بالهزل
It is not a thing for amusement.

إنهم يكيدون كيدا
As for them, they are but plotting a scheme,

وأكيد كيدا
And I am planning a scheme.

فمهل الكافرين أمهلهم رويدا
Therefore grant a delay to the Unbelievers: Give respite to them gently (for awhile).

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم سبح اسم ربك الأعلى
Glorify the name of thy Guardian-Lord Most High,

الذي خلق فسوى
Who hath created, and further, given order and proportion;

والذي قدر فهدى
Who hath ordained laws. And granted guidance;

والذي أخرج المرعى
And Who bringeth out the (green and luscious) pasture,

فجعله غثاء أحوى
And then doth make it (but) swarthy stubble.

سنقرئك فلا تنسى
By degrees shall We teach thee to declare (the Message), so thou shalt not forget,

إلا ما شاء الله إنه يعلم الجهر وما يخفى
Except as Allah wills: For He knoweth what is manifest and what is hidden.

ونيسرك لليسرى
And We will make it easy for thee (to follow) the simple (Path).

فذكر إن نفعت الذكرى
Therefore give admonition in case the admonition profits (the hearer).

سيذكر من يخشى
The admonition will be received by those who fear (Allah):

ويتجنبها الأشقى
But it will be avoided by those most unfortunate ones,

الذي يصلى النار الكبرى
Who will enter the Great Fire,

ثم لا يموت فيها ولا يحيى
In which they will then neither die nor live.

قد أفلح من تزكى
But those will prosper who purify themselves,

وذكر اسم ربه فصلى
And glorify the name of their Guardian-Lord, and (lift their hearts) in prayer.

بل تؤثرون الحياة الدنيا
Nay (behold), ye prefer the life of this world;

والآخرة خير وأبقى
But the Hereafter is better and more enduring.

إن هذا لفي الصحف الأولى
And this is in the Books of the earliest (Revelation),-

صحف إبراهيم وموسى
The Books of Abraham and Moses.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم هل أتاك حديث الغاشية
Has the story reached thee of the overwhelming (Event)?

وجوه يومئذ خاشعة
Some faces, that Day, will be humiliated,

عاملة ناصبة
Labouring (hard), weary,-

تصلى نارا حامية
The while they enter the Blazing Fire,-

تسقى من عين آنية
The while they are given, to drink, of a boiling hot spring,

ليس لهم طعام إلا من ضريع
No food will there be for them but a bitter Dhari'

لا يسمن ولا يغني من جوع
Which will neither nourish nor satisfy hunger.

وجوه يومئذ ناعمة
(Other) faces that Day will be joyful,

لسعيها راضية
Pleased with their striving,-

في جنة عالية
In a Garden on high,

لا تسمع فيها لاغية
Where they shall hear no (word) of vanity:

فيها عين جارية
Therein will be a bubbling spring:

فيها سرر مرفوعة
Therein will be Thrones (of dignity), raised on high,

وأكواب موضوعة
Goblets placed (ready),

ونمارق مصفوفة
And cushions set in rows,

وزرابي مبثوثة
And rich carpets (all) spread out.

أفلا ينظرون إلى الإبل كيف خلقت
Do they not look at the Camels, how they are made?-

وإلى السماء كيف رفعت
And at the Sky, how it is raised high?-

وإلى الجبال كيف نصبت
And at the Mountains, how they are fixed firm?-

وإلى الأرض كيف سطحت
And at the Earth, how it is spread out?

فذكر إنما أنت مذكر
Therefore do thou give admonition, for thou art one to admonish.

لست عليهم بمصيطر
Thou art not one to manage (men's) affairs.

إلا من تولى وكفر
But if any turn away and reject Allah,-

فيعذبه الله العذاب الأكبر
Allah will punish him with a mighty Punishment,

إن إلينا إيابهم
For to Us will be their return;

ثم إن علينا حسابهم
Then it will be for Us to call them to account.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم والفجر
By the break of Day

وليال عشر
By the Nights twice five;

والشفع والوتر
By the even and odd (contrasted);

والليل إذا يسر
And by the Night when it passeth away;-

هل في ذلك قسم لذي حجر
Is there (not) in these an adjuration (or evidence) for those who understand?

ألم تر كيف فعل ربك بعاد
Seest thou not how thy Lord dealt with the 'Ad (people),-

إرم ذات العماد
Of the (city of) Iram, with lofty pillars,

التي لم يخلق مثلها في البلاد
The like of which were not produced in (all) the land?

وثمود الذين جابوا الصخر بالواد
And with the Thamud (people), who cut out (huge) rocks in the valley?-

وفرعون ذي الأوتاد
And with Pharaoh, lord of stakes?

الذين طغوا في البلاد
(All) these transgressed beyond bounds in the lands,

فأكثروا فيها الفساد
And heaped therein mischief (on mischief).

فصب عليهم ربك سوط عذاب
Therefore did thy Lord pour on them a scourge of diverse chastisements:

إن ربك لبالمرصاد
For thy Lord is (as a Guardian) on a watch-tower.

فأما الإنسان إذا ما ابتلاه ربه فأكرمه ونعمه فيقول ربي أكرمن
Now, as for man, when his Lord trieth him, giving him honour and gifts, then saith he, (puffed up), "My Lord hath honoured me."

وأما إذا ما ابتلاه فقدر عليه رزقه فيقول ربي أهانن
But when He trieth him, restricting his subsistence for him, then saith he (in despair), "My Lord hath humiliated me!"

كلا بل لا تكرمون اليتيم
Nay, nay! but ye honour not the orphans!

ولا تحاضون على طعام المسكين
Nor do ye encourage one another to feed the poor!-

وتأكلون التراث أكلا لما
And ye devour inheritance - all with greed,

وتحبون المال حبا جما
And ye love wealth with inordinate love!

كلا إذا دكت الأرض دكا دكا
Nay! When the earth is pounded to powder,

وجاء ربك والملك صفا صفا
And thy Lord cometh, and His angels, rank upon rank,

وجيء يومئذ بجهنم يومئذ يتذكر الإنسان وأنى له الذكرى
And Hell, that Day, is brought (face to face),- on that Day will man remember, but how will that remembrance profit him?

يقول يا ليتني قدمت لحياتي
He will say: "Ah! Would that I had sent forth (good deeds) for (this) my (Future) Life!"

فيومئذ لا يعذب عذابه أحد
For, that Day, His Chastisement will be such as none (else) can inflict,

ولا يوثق وثاقه أحد
And His bonds will be such as none (other) can bind.

يا أيتها النفس المطمئنة
(To the righteous soul will be said:) "O (thou) soul, in (complete) rest and satisfaction!

ارجعي إلى ربك راضية مرضية
"Come back thou to thy Lord,- well pleased (thyself), and well-pleasing unto Him!

فادخلي في عبادي
"Enter thou, then, among My devotees!

وادخلي جنتي
"Yea, enter thou My Heaven!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم لا أقسم بهذا البلد
I do call to witness this City;-

وأنت حل بهذا البلد
And thou art a freeman of this City;-

ووالد وما ولد
And (the mystic ties of) parent and child;-

لقد خلقنا الإنسان في كبد
Verily We have created man into toil and struggle.

أيحسب أن لن يقدر عليه أحد
Thinketh he, that none hath power over him?

يقول أهلكت مالا لبدا
He may say (boastfully); Wealth have I squandered in abundance!

أيحسب أن لم يره أحد
Thinketh he that none beholdeth him?

ألم نجعل له عينين
Have We not made for him a pair of eyes?-

ولسانا وشفتين
And a tongue, and a pair of lips?-

وهديناه النجدين
And shown him the two highways?

فلا اقتحم العقبة
But he hath made no haste on the path that is steep.

وما أدراك ما العقبة
And what will explain to thee the path that is steep?-

فك رقبة
(It is:) freeing the bondman;

أو إطعام في يوم ذي مسغبة
Or the giving of food in a day of privation

يتيما ذا مقربة
To the orphan with claims of relationship,

أو مسكينا ذا متربة
Or to the indigent (down) in the dust.

ثم كان من الذين آمنوا وتواصوا بالصبر وتواصوا بالمرحمة
Then will he be of those who believe, and enjoin patience, (constancy, and self-restraint), and enjoin deeds of kindness and compassion.

أولئك أصحاب الميمنة
Such are the Companions of the Right Hand.

والذين كفروا بآياتنا هم أصحاب المشأمة
But those who reject Our Signs, they are the (unhappy) Companions of the Left Hand.

عليهم نار مؤصدة
On them will be Fire vaulted over (all round).

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم والشمس وضحاها
By the Sun and his (glorious) splendour;

والقمر إذا تلاها
By the Moon as she follows him;

والنهار إذا جلاها
By the Day as it shows up (the Sun's) glory;

والليل إذا يغشاها
By the Night as it conceals it;

والسماء وما بناها
By the Firmament and its (wonderful) structure;

والأرض وما طحاها
By the Earth and its (wide) expanse:

ونفس وما سواها
By the Soul, and the proportion and order given to it;

فألهمها فجورها وتقواها
And its enlightenment as to its wrong and its right;-

قد أفلح من زكاها
Truly he succeeds that purifies it,

وقد خاب من دساها
And he fails that corrupts it!

كذبت ثمود بطغواها
The Thamud (people) rejected (their prophet) through their inordinate wrong-doing,

إذ انبعث أشقاها
Behold, the most wicked man among them was deputed (for impiety).

فقال لهم رسول الله ناقة الله وسقياها
But the Messenger of Allah said to them: "It is a She-camel of Allah! And (bar her not from) having her drink!"

فكذبوه فعقروها فدمدم عليهم ربهم بذنبهم فسواها
Then they rejected him (as a false prophet), and they hamstrung her. So their Lord, on account of their crime, obliterated their traces and made them equal (in destruction, high and low)!

ولا يخاف عقباها
And for Him is no fear of its consequences.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم والليل إذا يغشى
By the Night as it conceals (the light);

والنهار إذا تجلى
By the Day as it appears in glory;

وما خلق الذكر والأنثى
By (the mystery of) the creation of male and female;-

إن سعيكم لشتى
Verily, (the ends) ye strive for are diverse.

فأما من أعطى واتقى
So he who gives (in charity) and fears (Allah),

وصدق بالحسنى
And (in all sincerity) testifies to the best,-

فسنيسره لليسرى
We will indeed make smooth for him the path to Bliss.

وأما من بخل واستغنى
But he who is a greedy miser and thinks himself self-sufficient,

وكذب بالحسنى
And gives the lie to the best,-

فسنيسره للعسرى
We will indeed make smooth for him the path to Misery;

وما يغني عنه ماله إذا تردى
Nor will his wealth profit him when he falls headlong (into the Pit).

إن علينا للهدى
Verily We take upon Ourselves to guide,

وإن لنا للآخرة والأولى
And verily unto Us (belong) the End and the Beginning.

فأنذرتكم نارا تلظى
Therefore do I warn you of a Fire blazing fiercely;

لا يصلاها إلا الأشقى
None shall reach it but those most unfortunate ones

الذي كذب وتولى
Who give the lie to Truth and turn their backs.

وسيجنبها الأتقى
But those most devoted to Allah shall be removed far from it,-

الذي يؤتي ماله يتزكى
Those who spend their wealth for increase in self-purification,

وما لأحد عنده من نعمة تجزى
And have in their minds no favour from anyone for which a reward is expected in return,

إلا ابتغاء وجه ربه الأعلى
But only the desire to seek for the Countenance of their Lord Most High;

ولسوف يرضى
And soon will they attain (complete) satisfaction.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم والضحى
By the Glorious Morning Light,

والليل إذا سجى
And by the Night when it is still,-

ما ودعك ربك وما قلى
Thy Guardian-Lord hath not forsaken thee, nor is He displeased.

وللآخرة خير لك من الأولى
And verily the Hereafter will be better for thee than the present.

ولسوف يعطيك ربك فترضى
And soon will thy Guardian-Lord give thee (that wherewith) thou shalt be well-pleased.

ألم يجدك يتيما فآوى
Did He not find thee an orphan and give thee shelter (and care)?

ووجدك ضالا فهدى
And He found thee wandering, and He gave thee guidance.

ووجدك عائلا فأغنى
And He found thee in need, and made thee independent.

فأما اليتيم فلا تقهر
Therefore, treat not the orphan with harshness,

وأما السائل فلا تنهر
Nor repulse the petitioner (unheard);

وأما بنعمة ربك فحدث
But the bounty of the Lord - rehearse and proclaim!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم ألم نشرح لك صدرك
Have We not expanded thee thy breast?-

ووضعنا عنك وزرك
And removed from thee thy burden

الذي أنقض ظهرك
The which did gall thy back?-

ورفعنا لك ذكرك
And raised high the esteem (in which) thou (art held)?

فإن مع العسر يسرا
So, verily, with every difficulty, there is relief:

إن مع العسر يسرا
Verily, with every difficulty there is relief.

فإذا فرغت فانصب
Therefore, when thou art free (from thine immediate task), still labour hard,

وإلى ربك فارغب
And to thy Lord turn (all) thy attention.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم والتين والزيتون
By the Fig and the Olive,

وطور سينين
And the Mount of Sinai,

وهذا البلد الأمين
And this City of security,-

لقد خلقنا الإنسان في أحسن تقويم
We have indeed created man in the best of moulds,

ثم رددناه أسفل سافلين
Then do We abase him (to be) the lowest of the low,-

إلا الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات فلهم أجر غير ممنون
Except such as believe and do righteous deeds: For they shall have a reward unfailing.

فما يكذبك بعد بالدين
Then what can, after this, contradict thee, as to the judgment (to come)?

أليس الله بأحكم الحاكمين
Is not Allah the wisest of judges?

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم اقرأ باسم ربك الذي خلق
Proclaim! (or read!) in the name of thy Lord and Cherisher, Who created-

خلق الإنسان من علق
Created man, out of a (mere) clot of congealed blood:

اقرأ وربك الأكرم
Proclaim! And thy Lord is Most Bountiful,-

الذي علم بالقلم
He Who taught (the use of) the pen,-

علم الإنسان ما لم يعلم
Taught man that which he knew not.

كلا إن الإنسان ليطغى
Nay, but man doth transgress all bounds,

أن رآه استغنى
In that he looketh upon himself as self-sufficient.

إن إلى ربك الرجعى
Verily, to thy Lord is the return (of all).

أرأيت الذي ينهى
Seest thou one who forbids-

عبدا إذا صلى
A votary when he (turns) to pray?

أرأيت إن كان على الهدى
Seest thou if he is on (the road of) Guidance?-

أو أمر بالتقوى
Or enjoins Righteousness?

أرأيت إن كذب وتولى
Seest thou if he denies (Truth) and turns away?

ألم يعلم بأن الله يرى
Knoweth he not that Allah doth see?

كلا لئن لم ينته لنسفعا بالناصية
Let him beware! If he desist not, We will drag him by the forelock,-

ناصية كاذبة خاطئة
A lying, sinful forelock!

فليدع ناديه
Then, let him call (for help) to his council (of comrades):

سندع الزبانية
We will call on the angels of punishment (to deal with him)!

كلا لا تطعه واسجد واقترب
Nay, heed him not: But bow down in adoration, and bring thyself the closer (to Allah)!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم إنا أنزلناه في ليلة القدر
We have indeed revealed this (Message) in the Night of Power:

وما أدراك ما ليلة القدر
And what will explain to thee what the night of power is?

ليلة القدر خير من ألف شهر
The Night of Power is better than a thousand months.

تنزل الملائكة والروح فيها بإذن ربهم من كل أمر
Therein come down the angels and the Spirit by Allah's permission, on every errand:

سلام هي حتى مطلع الفجر
Peace!... This until the rise of morn!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم لم يكن الذين كفروا من أهل الكتاب والمشركين منفكين حتى تأتيهم البينة
Those who reject (Truth), among the People of the Book and among the Polytheists, were not going to depart (from their ways) until there should come to them Clear Evidence,-

رسول من الله يتلو صحفا مطهرة
An messenger from Allah, rehearsing scriptures kept pure and holy:

فيها كتب قيمة
Wherein are laws (or decrees) right and straight.

وما تفرق الذين أوتوا الكتاب إلا من بعد ما جاءتهم البينة
Nor did the People of the Book make schisms, until after there came to them Clear Evidence.

وما أمروا إلا ليعبدوا الله مخلصين له الدين حنفاء ويقيموا الصلاة ويؤتوا الزكاة وذلك دين القيمة
And they have been commanded no more than this: To worship Allah, offering Him sincere devotion, being true (in faith); to establish regular prayer; and to practise regular charity; and that is the Religion Right and Straight.

إن الذين كفروا من أهل الكتاب والمشركين في نار جهنم خالدين فيها أولئك هم شر البرية
Those who reject (Truth), among the People of the Book and among the Polytheists, will be in Hell-Fire, to dwell therein (for aye). They are the worst of creatures.

إن الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات أولئك هم خير البرية
Those who have faith and do righteous deeds,- they are the best of creatures.

جزاؤهم عند ربهم جنات عدن تجري من تحتها الأنهار خالدين فيها أبدا رضي الله عنهم ورضوا عنه ذلك لمن خشي ربه
Their reward is with Allah: Gardens of Eternity, beneath which rivers flow; they will dwell therein for ever; Allah well pleased with them, and they with Him: all this for such as fear their Lord and Cherisher.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم إذا زلزلت الأرض زلزالها
When the earth is shaken to her (utmost) convulsion,

وأخرجت الأرض أثقالها
And the earth throws up her burdens (from within),

وقال الإنسان ما لها
And man cries (distressed): 'What is the matter with her?'-

يومئذ تحدث أخبارها
On that Day will she declare her tidings:

بأن ربك أوحى لها
For that thy Lord will have given her inspiration.

يومئذ يصدر الناس أشتاتا ليروا أعمالهم
On that Day will men proceed in companies sorted out, to be shown the deeds that they (had done).

فمن يعمل مثقال ذرة خيرا يره
Then shall anyone who has done an atom's weight of good, see it!

ومن يعمل مثقال ذرة شرا يره
And anyone who has done an atom's weight of evil, shall see it.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم والعاديات ضبحا
By the (Steeds) that run, with panting (breath),

فالموريات قدحا
And strike sparks of fire,

فالمغيرات صبحا
And push home the charge in the morning,

فأثرن به نقعا
And raise the dust in clouds the while,

فوسطن به جمعا
And penetrate forthwith into the midst (of the foe) en masse;-

إن الإنسان لربه لكنود
Truly man is, to his Lord, ungrateful;

وإنه على ذلك لشهيد
And to that (fact) he bears witness (by his deeds);

وإنه لحب الخير لشديد
And violent is he in his love of wealth.

أفلا يعلم إذا بعثر ما في القبور
Does he not know,- when that which is in the graves is scattered abroad

وحصل ما في الصدور
And that which is (locked up) in (human) breasts is made manifest-

إن ربهم بهم يومئذ لخبير
That their Lord had been Well-acquainted with them, (even to) that Day?

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم القارعة
The (Day) of Noise and Clamour:

ما القارعة
What is the (Day) of Noise and Clamour?

وما أدراك ما القارعة
And what will explain to thee what the (Day) of Noise and Clamour is?

يوم يكون الناس كالفراش المبثوث
(It is) a Day whereon men will be like moths scattered about,

وتكون الجبال كالعهن المنفوش
And the mountains will be like carded wool.

فأما من ثقلت موازينه
Then, he whose balance (of good deeds) will be (found) heavy,

فهو في عيشة راضية
Will be in a life of good pleasure and satisfaction.

وأما من خفت موازينه
But he whose balance (of good deeds) will be (found) light,-

فأمه هاوية
Will have his home in a (bottomless) Pit.

وما أدراك ما هيه
And what will explain to thee what this is?

نار حامية
(It is) a Fire Blazing fiercely!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم ألهاكم التكاثر
The mutual rivalry for piling up (the good things of this world) diverts you (from the more serious things),

حتى زرتم المقابر
Until ye visit the graves.

كلا سوف تعلمون
But nay, ye soon shall know (the reality).

ثم كلا سوف تعلمون
Again, ye soon shall know!

كلا لو تعلمون علم اليقين
Nay, were ye to know with certainty of mind, (ye would beware!)

لترون الجحيم
Ye shall certainly see Hell-Fire!

ثم لترونها عين اليقين
Again, ye shall see it with certainty of sight!

ثم لتسألن يومئذ عن النعيم
Then, shall ye be questioned that Day about the joy (ye indulged in!).

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم والعصر
By (the Token of) Time (through the ages),

إن الإنسان لفي خسر
Verily Man is in loss,

إلا الذين آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات وتواصوا بالحق وتواصوا بالصبر
Except such as have Faith, and do righteous deeds, and (join together) in the mutual teaching of Truth, and of Patience and Constancy.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم ويل لكل همزة لمزة
Woe to every (kind of) scandal-monger and-backbiter,

الذي جمع مالا وعدده
Who pileth up wealth and layeth it by,

يحسب أن ماله أخلده
Thinking that his wealth would make him last for ever!

كلا لينبذن في الحطمة
By no means! He will be sure to be thrown into That which Breaks to Pieces,

وما أدراك ما الحطمة
And what will explain to thee That which Breaks to Pieces?

نار الله الموقدة
(It is) the Fire of (the Wrath of) Allah kindled (to a blaze),

التي تطلع على الأفئدة
The which doth mount (Right) to the Hearts:

إنها عليهم مؤصدة
It shall be made into a vault over them,

في عمد ممددة
In columns outstretched.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم ألم تر كيف فعل ربك بأصحاب الفيل
Seest thou not how thy Lord dealt with the Companions of the Elephant?

ألم يجعل كيدهم في تضليل
Did He not make their treacherous plan go astray?

وأرسل عليهم طيرا أبابيل
And He sent against them Flights of Birds,

ترميهم بحجارة من سجيل
Striking them with stones of baked clay.

فجعلهم كعصف مأكول
Then did He make them like an empty field of stalks and straw, (of which the corn) has been eaten up.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم لإيلاف قريش
For the covenants (of security and safeguard enjoyed) by the Quraish,

إيلافهم رحلة الشتاء والصيف
Their covenants (covering) journeys by winter and summer,-

فليعبدوا رب هذا البيت
Let them adore the Lord of this House,

الذي أطعمهم من جوع وآمنهم من خوف
Who provides them with food against hunger, and with security against fear (of danger).

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم أرأيت الذي يكذب بالدين
Seest thou one who denies the Judgment (to come)?

فذلك الذي يدع اليتيم
Then such is the (man) who repulses the orphan (with harshness),

ولا يحض على طعام المسكين
And encourages not the feeding of the indigent.

فويل للمصلين
So woe to the worshippers

الذين هم عن صلاتهم ساهون
Who are neglectful of their prayers,

الذين هم يراءون
Those who (want but) to be seen (of men),

ويمنعون الماعون
But refuse (to supply) (even) neighbourly needs.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم إنا أعطيناك الكوثر
To thee have We granted the Fount (of Abundance).

فصل لربك وانحر
Therefore to thy Lord turn in Prayer and Sacrifice.

إن شانئك هو الأبتر
For he who hateth thee, he will be cut off (from Future Hope).

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم قل يا أيها الكافرون
Say: O ye that reject Faith!

لا أعبد ما تعبدون
I worship not that which ye worship,

ولا أنتم عابدون ما أعبد
Nor will ye worship that which I worship.

ولا أنا عابد ما عبدتم
And I will not worship that which ye have been wont to worship,

ولا أنتم عابدون ما أعبد
Nor will ye worship that which I worship.

لكم دينكم ولي دين
To you be your Way, and to me mine.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم إذا جاء نصر الله والفتح
When comes the Help of Allah, and Victory,

ورأيت الناس يدخلون في دين الله أفواجا
And thou dost see the people enter Allah's Religion in crowds,

فسبح بحمد ربك واستغفره إنه كان توابا
Celebrate the praises of thy Lord, and pray for His Forgiveness: For He is Oft-Returning (in Grace and Mercy).

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم تبت يدا أبي لهب وتب
Perish the hands of the Father of Flame! Perish he!

ما أغنى عنه ماله وما كسب
No profit to him from all his wealth, and all his gains!

سيصلى نارا ذات لهب
Burnt soon will he be in a Fire of Blazing Flame!

وامرأته حمالة الحطب
His wife shall carry the (crackling) wood - As fuel!-

في جيدها حبل من مسد
A twisted rope of palm-leaf fibre round her (own) neck!

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم قل هو الله أحد
Say: He is Allah, the One and Only;

الله الصمد
Allah, the Eternal, Absolute;

لم يلد ولم يولد
He begetteth not, nor is He begotten;

ولم يكن له كفوا أحد
And there is none like unto Him.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم قل أعوذ برب الفلق
Say: I seek refuge with the Lord of the Dawn

من شر ما خلق
From the mischief of created things;

ومن شر غاسق إذا وقب
From the mischief of Darkness as it overspreads;

ومن شر النفاثات في العقد
From the mischief of those who practise secret arts;

ومن شر حاسد إذا حسد
And from the mischief of the envious one as he practises envy.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم قل أعوذ برب الناس
Say: I seek refuge with the Lord and Cherisher of Mankind,

ملك الناس
The King (or Ruler) of Mankind,

إله الناس
The god (or judge) of Mankind,-

من شر الوسواس الخناس
From the mischief of the Whisperer (of Evil), who withdraws (after his whisper),-

الذي يوسوس في صدور الناس
(The same) who whispers into the hearts of Mankind,-

من الجنة والناس
Among Jinns and among men.

